Not only will the revolution not be televised—at least in the case of Sen. Bernie Sanders—it appears to have an expiration date.
Despite collecting millions in small-dollar donations and packing thousands of people into arenas around the country, despite topping Hillary Clinton for the first time in a national poll of likely Democratic voters, the path to victory has narrowed sharply for Sanders. Some would argue that a window of opportunity slammed shut Sunday night in Nevada and that the upcoming race in South Carolina is the proverbial kitty-bar.
Sanders may well have the volunteers and the money to keep going, but after March 15 he’ll have to grapple with a new set of questions. Does he still have the ability to push Clinton further left? And can he bring enough new voters into the process to exert any real influence?  
Undoubtedly, Sanders will lose the South Carolina primary set for Feb. 27. The bad news is—with the exception of possibly Vermont, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin—he’ll likely keep losing though April. The polls are not kind and, with less than two weeks before Super Tuesday, pulling off wins in states like Georgia, Virginia, North Carolina, and Texas seems all but impossible. According to FiveThirtyEight.com, Clinton holds a 50-99 percent likelihood of winning some of the most delegate-rich and highly diverse states on the calendar.
Sanders, the self-professed anti-establishment candidate, has run on a platform that attacks income inequality, as well as promises to expand access to health care and college education. His message has attracted support from mostly white progressives who are convinced that Sanders is the best candidate to carry the Democratic banner in the fall campaign. For them, Clinton represents all that is wrong in Washington.
The problem for Sanders is that he has nowhere to grow. Black voters, who will dominate many of the coming primaries, have not responded to his message. Even black millennials, thought to be good prospects, are breaking in favor of Clinton. They are, it appears by the ballots cast in Nevada and polling in upcoming states, voting with their parents and grandparents. It must be said that Clinton won the Nevada black vote by a 3-to-1 margin and that crossed age and income. And despite what entrance polling data said in Nevada, according to analysis published by NBC News, she may have won Hispanics as well.
After Sanders won New Hampshire and nearly bested the former secretary of state in Iowa, many began to challenge the notion of Clinton’s inevitability. There were cracks, they said, in the “firewall.” Expectations were managed downward ahead of Nevada, even by the Clinton campaign—which started organizing in the state last April. The Sanders camp appeared to be stunned by their good fortunes. By comparison, they did not put boots on the ground until late winter, when it became clear that he could be competitive there.
But then Hispanic civil-rights leaders and members of Congress, including California Rep. Xavier Becerra and Dolores Huerta, rang in and openly challenged Sanders on past immigration policy votes. Then, too, endorsements began to roll through the piedmonts of the Palmetto State. Black pastors and elected officials began digging a trench around South Carolina.
Taken together, if the trend holds, there is no path to victory left for Sanders. At this late stage in the campaign, unlike Republicans, there is limited growth potential for either candidate in such a small field.  
More critically, one rationale for the Sanders candidacy dries up under scrutiny. Turnout numbers and the anticipated brief nature of the primary mean he has not and will not drive increased voter participation.  The wave never arrived and there is no sign of it on the horizon.
One of the more vexing things about this election year is the open hostility to basic election math and the exhausting comparisons between Sanders and the road that then-Sen. Barack Obama faced in 2008. There are a paucity of similarities between Sanders and President Obama as candidates and even fewer parallels in terms of campaign and election-year dynamics.
One day soon, Sanders will take to a lectern and announce that he is suspending his campaign. What follows could be a push for Clinton to embrace single-payer health care or take on student loan debt in a more substantial way. Sanders could harness his coalition ahead of the Democratic convention and attempt to force Clinton’s hand on any number of issues. Or Sanders could decide to actively campaign for U.S. Senate and House candidates and help deliver a new Congress that will take up those reforms.
Ultimately, what Sanders does after he exits will reveal if the movement was about him or us. 
Bernie Sanders may not come out and say it directly—but he wants you to know that Hillary Clinton can't be trusted.
The fight to win the Democratic nomination increasingly looks like an uphill battle for the Vermont senator and self-described Democratic socialist. So Sanders is trying to convince voters he’s the best choice to sit atop the Democratic ticket by drawing a sharp contrast with his White House rival. Sanders has long suggested he’s more trustworthy, and therefore a better candidate, than Clinton. To make that case, he has highlighted her ties to Wall Street and described his track record as more consistently progressive. Now, Sanders is putting a finer point on that argument by doubling down on a critique of his competitor and promising to keep it up.
On Monday, Sanders stressed his opposition to big money in politics and trade deals he believes benefit corporations at the expense of workers during a speech in Boston, and took pains to paint Clinton as his opposite on both counts. The speech sent a clear message. To hear Sanders tell it, he’s the candidate who can be trusted to protect the American middle class, while Clinton cozies up to wealthy elites. “The people of the United States need to know the difference between hastily-adopted campaign rhetoric, and the real record and long held ideas of the candidates,” Sanders said at the event, promising that he will continue to “contrast my record to Secretary Clinton’s” in the weeks to come.
It makes sense for Sanders to go on the offensive. He notched a win in the New Hampshire primary earlier this month, but suffered defeat at the Nevada Democratic caucuses over the weekend. Looking ahead, the primary race doesn’t seem likely to get easier for Sanders. Clinton is considered the favorite to win the rapidly approaching South Carolina Democratic primary given her popularity with black voters, a key demographic in the state. In March, Sanders will face off against Clinton on Super Tuesday, a series of contests that could prove a make-or-break moment for his insurgent campaign.
The strategy is not without risk, however. Effective political candidates point out ways they differ from their rivals. But Sanders has made promises not to run a negative campaign, and Clinton allies are likely to point to his latest plea as evidence of hypocrisy. If that happens, it wouldn’t be the first time the Clinton campaign has accused Sanders of “going negative.” Highlighting his opposition to big money in politics also opens Sanders up to fresh attack. That’s because he can’t actually stop super PACs from supporting him, and a nurses union super PAC  has already spent hundreds of dollars to support his candidacy.
As the primary drags on, Sanders needs to expand his appeal and increase his name recognition. Since his critiques of Clinton largely reiterate points he has made before, it is hard to say if the effort will broaden his appeal. If Sanders keeps it up, though, the strategy will certainly garner him attention, and that could introduce his message to voters previously unfamiliar with it. There is also reason to believe that Sanders’s effort will tap into a vein of existing voter belief. New Hampshire exit polls show that voters who valued honesty and trustworthiness overwhelmingly backed Sanders over Clinton, while Clinton won voters who said that experience mattered most. If nothing else, the senator’s critiques are sure to fire up his loyal fans.
At his Monday press conference, Sanders suggested that Clinton may well be in the pocket of Wall Street and special interests, and talked up his own reliance on small-dollar fundraising. “Here is the truth, and a very profound difference between Secretary Clinton and myself,” Sanders said, “Secretary Clinton has a number of super PACs, which today are raising very, very large sums of money from Wall Street and other powerful special interests.” Sanders also implied that Clinton can’t be trusted to stand with American workers by highlighting his record on trade policy. He talked up his opposition to trade deals that he believes unduly benefit corporations, and called into question the sincerity of Clinton’s opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a Pacific Rim nation trade pact. Clinton came out against the deal, which Sanders opposes, during her 2016 bid, but expressed confidence in negotiations over the trade agreement as secretary of state.
Sanders framed his critiques in service of a broader argument that he’s the true populist candidate. “What the American people have got to determine is which candidate, whose life work is about standing up to the billionaire class, standing up to Wall Street, standing up to corporate interests,” Sanders said. “That’s what this campaign is essentially about.”
Of course, Clinton has her own case to make. She has suggested that she alone has the experience as well as the judgement needed to tackle a wide array of challenges facing the nation and keep the country safe. She has implied that she is the more serious candidate, and argued that she can actually get things done. Clinton allies have also pointed to Sanders’s record on gun control, foreign policy, and immigration as areas of weakness. That criticism isn’t likely to let up either. The Clinton campaign convened a press call on Monday where Connecticut Governor Dan Malloy criticized Sanders’s votes on gun legislation, including the senator’s record of voting against the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act.
Now that Sanders has promised he’ll continue to contrast his candidacy with Clinton’s, the question becomes how far he’ll go. The Democratic 2016 race has looked downright cordial compared to the vitriol and insult-trading on the Republican side, an animosity stoked by GOP front-runner Donald Trump. But the relationship between Sanders and Clinton has nevertheless grown increasingly strained as the primary fight drags on. And that strain is sure to intensify.
The Democratic primary is being defined—and could be decided—by a generational divide. Young voters are flocking to Bernie Sanders, as countless articles point out, and the results in Iowa back this up: Sanders won caucus voters under 30 by an astounding 70-point margin, while Hillary Clinton won those over 65 by 43 points. The theories given for this divide are myriad. Many young voters see Clinton as a corrupt or untrustworthy insider, whereas Sanders “seems sincere.” Many older voters, meanwhile, find Sanders’s policies impractical and see in Clinton a historic opportunity to elect the first female president. But all these arguments seem to agree on one thing: Sanders is leading a semi-socialist insurgency against the party establishment.
Surveying one hundred years of history, though, the question is not why younger voters are embracing Sanders’s populist revolution, but why the Baby Boomer generation came to believe that Bill and Hillary Clinton—with their close ties to big business—should become the standard-bearers for the nation’s liberal party. In other words, Bernie’s millennial army isn’t the generational exception. Hillary’s Boomers are. 
Transported to the early part of the previous century, Sanders’s positions and rhetoric would sound a lot more traditionally Democratic than Clinton’s. Consider his New Hampshire victory speech, where he said, “Tonight, we served notice to the political and economic establishment of this country that the American people will not continue to accept a corrupt campaign finance system that is undermining American democracy, and we will not accept a rigged economy in which ordinary Americans work longer hours for lower wages, while almost all new income and wealth goes to the top 1 percent.” That’s much closer to progressive Democratic forebears like William Jennings Bryan (the party’s presidential nominee in 1896, 1900, and 1908) and Franklin Roosevelt (president from 1933 to 1945) than Hillary Clinton is.
What changed? The fundamental makeup of the American economy.
Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics makes clear how few professional options most people had in the first half of the twentieth century. In 1910, fewer than 15 percent of people worked in managerial or professional roles. The great majority worked in manual jobs, and had no ladder to climb. 
The post-war Baby Boomer generation profoundly transformed the economy. In 1977, sociologists Barbara and John Ehrenreich argued that the middle of the twentieth century was marked by the ascendance of the Professional-Managerial Class. They defined this group as “mental workers who do not own the means of production,” which includes teachers, journalists, nurses, social workers, managers of all sorts, mid-level executives, government workers, and many others. 
During the young adulthoods of the Boomers, government policies made it easier for young people to join the PMC. Public colleges were inexpensive, and students graduated with little debt. Labor unions provided jobs like teacher and nurse a great deal of career stability. Very high marginal tax rates on very high earners encouraged companies to invest in younger workers. And a middle-class society based on manufacturing and construction encouraged dispersion into all sections of the country, which kept housing prices modest.
The relative ease of joining the middle class helps explain an anomaly of the Boomer generation of Democrats—the expunging of most class-based rhetoric. Jennings Bryan and Roosevelt regularly criticized finance and big business, sometimes even calling into question the morality of the very wealthy. Democrats of the sixties and seventies found a happy medium: subsidizing ways to join the middle class, not demonizing those at the top.
The Boomer generation undid many of the policies that had encouraged ascension to the PMC, and allowed workers to flourish in these careers. Welfare reform and free trade agreements undermined the bargaining positions of workers by giving workers less to fall back on and managers more options abroad. Increasing the costs of public education and asking students to finance those costs with debt left the next generation of workers with a heavy burden as they joined the PMC. 
More importantly, changes in professional norms and economic expectations have made joining the PMC an increasingly grim prospect. Teachers, who for decades enjoyed great autonomy in designing lesson plans and nurturing students, have faced an assault from the business community demanding they teach to standardized tests. Nurses and other professionals have seen their unions lose clout within the Democratic Party. And government workers are maligned as a waste of taxpayer money.
Even among elite PMC careers, workers are seeing much of their professional autonomy removed. Forty years ago, most lawyers worked in individual practice or small firms. Now, young lawyers are more likely to work for huge corporate law firms for very long hours doing depressing work like “document review,” all because they have no other choice if they want to pay back their mortgage-sized student loans. For the first seven years of a career as an investment banker, a young associate may work 90 hours a week—to support a Boomer managing director, who may only work 60. Young college professors are much more likely to be part-time and non-tenure track than Boomer professors were at the same points in their careers, leading to increased militancy among adjunct professors. 
In short, PMC jobs, especially for younger workers, increasingly resemble the crappy jobs of the beginning of the twentieth century. They have the proletarian character of the same monotonous thing day after day: spreadsheets, multiple-choice tests, document review. These changes in professional work mean we can no longer avoid the issue of class. Some economic groups have very different interests from others, and society generally is set up to benefit those at the top.
This has been the essential message of Sanders’s campaign: that the game is rigged, and the only thing to do is take on the employers. Her very recent adoption of that rhetoric notwithstanding, Clinton believes you can play the game and climb the ladder—that Americans should fight for their careers, not fight their employers. She has embraced the corporations and elite groups that determine these career trajectories, and won the support of Wall Street billionaires like George Soros and Warren Buffett. 
The heyday of the PMC may represent the anomalous decades, and the Boomers the one generation that happened to benefit from its rise. That Sanders sounds so much like Democrats from a century ago may mark a return to normalcy in which the Democratic Party fights for average people without career choices. Most young Democrats are already there.
Don't laugh. Donald Trump could actually win this thing. Not just the Republican nomination -- the presidency.
It would be very nice if a brand of politics built on fear, intimidation, racism and sheer meanness could not succeed in 21st-century America. Most political pundits have spent the past year wishing it to be so, refusing to contemplate the horror of a Trump presidency. And the business mogul may very well end up getting trounced in the general election if he does secure the GOP nomination.
But Trump has a perfectly plausible path to the presidency as a Republican. If he makes it to the White House, he'll get there by taking the Upper Midwest back from the Democratic Party.
When President Barack Obama was re-elected in 2012, he ran up the score in the Electoral College, winning 25 states, good for 332 total electoral votes. His victory was thorough. He only needed 270 electoral votes to win, and President George W. Bush had taken just 286 in his 2004 re-election.
To secure the presidency, Democrats only have to win the Northeast, the West Coast, and the Upper Midwest, including Iowa. Obama did far better, carrying every swing state in the country, including Florida and Virginia in the South, and Colorado, New Mexico and Nevada in the West.
But even with that massive margin, Obama could have been undone by victories for Republican rival Mitt Romney in just four states: Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. Together, those four Rust Belt states account for 64 electoral votes. Even if Floridians, Iowans, Coloradans and all of the other swing states had gone to Obama, his failure to capture the Upper Midwest would have been enough to hand the White House over to Romney.
Beyond demographics, Obama was able to capitalize on his rescue of the auto industry, a major issue in the 2012 race, as well as his opponent's weakness: The Bain Capital 47-percenter made the worst possible candidate for that region.
Trump is no Romney. He is running an unsubtle, racist campaign that has particularly targeted Latinos. His chances of winning swing states with significant Latino populations -- Florida, Colorado, Nevada and New Mexico -- are extremely low.
But he doesn't need them to win. All he has to do is carry the Rust Belt -- a region perfectly attuned to Trump's fiery denunciations of American trade policy and his angry condemnation of Washington corruption. While Romney hailed free trade, globalization and "creative destruction," Trump rails against the North American Free Trade Agreement and promises to bring jobs back home.
Who signed NAFTA into law? That would be former President Bill Clinton. Hillary Clinton can't be held responsible for everything her husband did in office. But don't think you won't hear it on repeat this fall anyway.
Hillary Clinton's inconsistency on trade has, thus far, only proven to be a liability for her among progressives. Republican leaders have broadly supported the trade policies that began under her husband -- NAFTA, the creation of the World Trade Organization and the establishment of permanent normal trade relations with China. If Trump wins the GOP nomination, he will be the first Republican in decades to challenge a Democratic candidate on trade.
And he will. His constant tirades against China and Mexico will go into overdrive, and he will constantly attack Clinton's back-and-forth record. Clinton currently opposes Obama's Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact with a host of Asian nations, but she helped negotiate it when she served as secretary of state, and top corporate lobbyists doubt the strength of her opposition.
Another fact to consider: The Rust Belt is disproportionately white. While there are pockets of color -- in Philadelphia, Flint, Detroit, Milwaukee -- the states are much whiter than the national average. America is 62 percent white, according to census data. Michigan, by contrast, is over 75 percent white, and Pennsylvania's population is more than 77 percent white. More than 80 percent of Ohio is white, as is over 82 percent of Wisconsin.
This doesn't mean that white people in these states will all flock to Trump. Many of them are die-hard Democrats and appalled by his bigoted campaign. But it does mean there are relatively fewer people of color in the Upper Midwest who will feel personally targeted by his message of intolerance, and plenty of white people who feel personally targeted by the last 30 years of U.S. economic policy. Visit a Trump rally or check out the photos and videos of Trump gatherings, and you'll get the idea.
Republicans lost Ohio in the last two elections and haven't won any of the other Upper Midwest states since the election of George H. W. Bush in 1988, and they haven't taken Wisconsin since Ronald Reagan's re-election. But in recent years, the GOP has nevertheless secured gubernatorial contests in all four states. The current governors of Ohio, Wisconsin and Michigan are all Republicans, and Pennsylvania had a GOP governor until last year. It won't be easy for Trump to run that table, but it's not insane to think that he could do so.
Obama won in 2012 by turning out huge numbers of people of color. For clearly different reasons, Trump's candidacy might inspire similar turnout for Democrats in 2016. Clinton maintains a tremendous lead over Democratic rival Bernie Sanders among black voters, and she has consistently carried union households -- a major constituency in the Upper Midwest.
But thus far in the primary contest, Clinton and Sanders are not turning out voters to the degree that Obama did in 2008. Democratic turnout in the Nevada caucuses was down by one-third relative to 2008, and turnout numbers in Iowa dropped as well. Despite a crowded Republican field, Trump took more voters in New Hampshire than Clinton did in a two-way race. The combined Granite State turnout for Trump and fellow GOP hopefuls John Kasich, Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio and Chris Christie was bigger than the collective vote total for Clinton and Sanders. Add in supporters of Republican candidates Carly Fiorina, Ben Carson and Rand Paul, and the numbers look even better for the GOP.
That wouldn't be troubling news for Democrats in a state like Alabama, where the party will never be able to pull off a victory. But at the presidential level, New Hampshire is barely considered a swing state anymore. Obama carried the state twice, and former Democratic hopeful John Kerry won it in 2004. (Had former Vice President Al Gore won the Granite State in 2000, Florida wouldn't have mattered.)
Polling data from Cleveland and Pittsburgh conducted by Working America, an offshoot of the AFL-CIO labor federation, should compound those concerns. The union group surveyed working-class households making less than $75,000 a year, 90 percent of which had voted in the 2012 election. Although 53 percent of voters in the December-to-January survey had not decided on a general election candidate, Trump was crushing the competition among those who had. Trump's 38 percent support was stronger than support for both Clinton and Sanders combined. And his backing wasn't simply from hard-line conservatives. One in four Democrats who had settled on a candidate had decided on Trump.
Minds change, campaigns change, and times change. Maybe having Trump on the ticket will motivate Democrats to turn out in high numbers just to vote against him. At the moment, Clinton holds a narrow lead over Trump in head-to-head polling, and Trump's numbers may collapse amid a Democratic ad blitz.
Republicans have been curiously reluctant to attack their front-runner, but Trump has also spent next to nothing attacking his competitors, relying on media attention that is unlikely to fade in a general election contest. And given Trump's ability to maintain his lead after making comments that would have sunk other candidates, it's not obvious how much attack ads will actually help. Jeb Bush's Super PAC, after all, managed to burn through over $100 million to generate … well, nothing.
Seasoned Republicans have spent the past six months with their heads in the sand, hoping Trump would just go away. Democrats can't afford to make the same mistake.
Marco Rubio has joined Ted Cruz in Donald Trump’s crosshairs.
Fresh off his Saturday win in the South Carolina Republican primary, Trump said Sunday he didn’t know whether Rubio, a Florida senator who finished second, was eligible to run for president and that “the lawyers have to determine that.”
“I don’t know,” Trump told George Stephanopoulos on ABC’s “This Week.” “I really – I’ve never looked at it, George. I honestly have never looked at it. As somebody said, he’s not. And I retweeted it. I have 14 million people between Twitter and Facebook and Instagram and I retweet things, and we start dialogue and it’s very interesting.”
Rubio brushed aside Trump’s assertions later on “This Week.”
“This is a pattern,” Rubio said. “This is a game he plays. He says something that’s edgy and outrageous and then the media flocks and covers that. And then no one else can get any coverage on anything else.
“And that worked where there were 15 people running for president. It’s not going to work anymore. I’m going to spend zero time on his interpretation of the Constitution with regards to eligibility.”
Trump was questioned on the issue after he retweeted a supporter Saturday who made the allegation and linked to a video from the Powdered Wig Society, a conservative news and commentary website. That video features an unidentified woman claiming someone can only be a “natural-born citizen” if the person’s father was a U.S. citizen.
The Constitution states only a “natural-born citizen” can be president, though it does not explicitly define that phrase.
Rubio, whose parents came to the U.S. from Cuba in the 1950s, was born in Florida in 1971. His parents were not U.S. citizens at the time.
Trump’s musings about Rubio’s eligibility is comparable to how his similar feud began with Cruz, a Texas senator, though that argument has since intensified.
Trump has argued that Cruz, who finished third in South Carolina, may not be a “natural-born citizen” because he was born in Canada, even though his mother was a U.S. citizen at the time of Cruz’s birth.
Numerous legal scholars have said both Cruz and Rubio are considered “natural-born citizens,” though Trump has said other experts disagree.
“I mean, let people make their own determination,” Trump said Sunday.
Similar questions of eligibility dogged previous Republican contenders such as John McCain in 2008, George Romney in 1968 and Barry Goldwater in 1964. McCain was born in Panama, Romney was born in Mexico and Goldwater was born in Arizona before it became an official U.S. state.
Establishment Republicans are reckoning with something they thought would never happen: That it might soon be too late to stop Donald Trump.
With the controversial businessman the clear front-runner heading into Nevada and next week’s Super Tuesday contests, there’s an emerging consensus that the odds of dislodging him are growing longer by the day. Whispered fears that Trump could become the Republican nominee have given way to a din of resigned conventional wisdom – with top party officials and strategists openly wondering what the path to defeating him will be.
“If anyone else in this field had gone second-first-first in the first three contests, we would all be saying that it’s over,” said Mike DuHaime, a former Republican National Committee political director who guided Chris Christie’s presidential bid.
“I think it’s uphill, and Washington underestimates how uphill it is – and that’s because they’ve persistently underestimated Trump,” said former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who sought the Republican nomination in 2012. If he wins Nevada, Gingrich added, “What is it that’s supposed to stop him?”
The biggest hurdle confronting the mogul’s four rivals is that they continue to divide support among themselves. In each of the three contests that have been held so for, the anti-Trump field has fractured, making it impossible for any single contender to surpass him. A similar dynamic could play out again in Nevada, with Trump failing to win a majority of support but still earning more than his opponents.
While the field has winnowed somewhat in recent days, the compressed nature of this year’s Republican primary calendar means there is precious little time for the anti-Trump field to consolidate. Should Trump notch his third consecutive win on Tuesday, some foresee him steamrolling through Super Tuesday a week later, when a quarter of the party’s delegates are awarded. A batch of newly released polls show him with sizable leads in several of those states, including Massachusetts and Georgia.
“Either Ted Cruz or Marco Rubio would have a shot at the nomination, but I don’t see how they can stop Donald Trump while both of them are splitting votes,” said Al Cardenas, a former Florida Republican Party and American Conservative Union chairman who had supported Jeb Bush. “I don’t see either senator, both of whom have strong-willed backers, dropping out any time soon. Maybe after March 15, but will that be too late to stop Trump?”
Trump still faces challenges, however. One prospect is that Republican groups launch a concerted offensive to take him down – something GOP elites have been discussing for months but haven’t yet acted on. Following Bush’s exit, some top donors to Right to Rise, the super PAC that had been supporting him, have been in discussions about turning the group into an anti-Trump vehicle, according to a source close to the group. A Right to Rise spokesman, Paul Lindsay, said no determination had yet been made on how the group would use its remaining funds, and the group's top strategist, Mike Murphy, denied any plans to use the money against Trump. Right to Rise entered the year with nearly $60 million on hand.
Another, perhaps far greater danger is that Rubio, who is emerging as the clear favorite of party leaders, coalesces the support of the Republican establishment and takes the baton as the anti-Trump alternative. Following Jeb Bush’s withdrawal from the race, Rubio has quickly moved to win over the former Florida governor’s backers, including top lawmakers and donors. One, Dirk Van Dongen, the president of the National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors and a longtime Bush family contributor, said in an email late Monday that he was joining the Rubio campaign.
Rubio is pushing to lock down others. According to three sources familiar with Rubio’s schedule, the Florida senator is preparing to embark on a March fundraising tour of Florida that will take him throughout the state. On March 11, Rubio plans to meet with some of the state’s biggest Republican bundlers in a bid to vacuum up fundraising dollars that helped to powered Bush’s bid.
After two razor-thin victories for Hillary Clinton and one blowout for Bernie Sanders in New Hampshire, the two Democratic presidential hopefuls are separated by just one pledged delegate
But maybe not for long.
Notwithstanding Clinton’s significant superdelegate advantage over Sanders, next on the calendar is the South Carolina Democratic primary. Clinton is expected to win there by double digits, thanks to her large support from African Americans, who made up more than half of the state’s Democratic electorate in 2008.
And on March 1 -- also known as “Super Tuesday” -- Democratic voters in 11 states will head to the ballot boxes. Seven of those Democratic contests are in the South, where many analysts believe that the large African-American and Hispanic populations will create a “firewall” for Clinton.
In several of those states -- Alabama, Georgia and Texas -- more than half of the 2008 Democratic electorate was nonwhite. Furthermore, these states are much more moderate. At least six in 10 voters from 2008 were moderates -- not liberals -- in Arkansas, Alabama, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Texas. These two groups are likely to boost Clinton to victories in most of these states.
The chart above, which depicts the proportion of white and liberal voters in each of the Democratic primary states in 2008, shows the mounting advantage for Clinton after Iowa and New Hampshire. States toward the upper-right corner are likely more friendly to Sanders, while states toward the lower-left corner are thought to be more friendly to Clinton.
Sanders narrowly lost to Clinton in Iowa, a state that is more than 90 percent white, but blew out Clinton in New Hampshire, a state where the population is 93 percent white and where 68 percent of Democrats described themselves as “liberal” in exit polls.
Clinton’s strong support among African Americans showed in Nevada, with 74 percent of black voters electing to caucus for Clinton, despite Sanders’ efforts to make inroads with the African American voters.
Entrance polls indicated that Sanders had a slight advantage among Hispanic voters, but some political analysts questioned the result and pointed to Clinton's victories in Hispanic-heavy districts in Las Vegas.
an Bernardino, Calif., a woman posted her “bayat,” or oath of allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, on a Facebook page moments before she and her husband opened fire in a conference room, killing 14 people.
The couple does not appear to have been directed by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, but seems to have been inspired by the group, following instructions issued this year for supporters to attack Western targets on their own.
But just weeks ago, ISIS demonstrated a significant leap in its ability to coordinate operations against the West when it directed two major attacks that killed hundreds: an assault across Paris and the downing of a Russian passenger jet in Egypt.
Whether inspired or coordinated, the recent attacks have drawn attention to the growing number of civilian deaths caused by the group outside of Iraq and Syria.
The Islamic State has a history of attacking mosques, hotels, busy city streets and other civilian targets in mostly non-Western countries. The civilian death toll outside Iraq and Syria has risen to nearly 1,000 since January.
The Islamic State has been expanding beyond its base in Iraq and Syria since it declared a caliphate, or Islamic state, in June 2014. The group is focused on three parallel tracks, according to Harleen Gambhir, an analyst at the Institute for the Study of War:
Hassan Aboud’s practiced baritone belied the malevolence in his words.
“Oh Darraji!” he sang. “Our state provided us ammunition and sent us to assassinate you.”
That state is the self-proclaimed Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, the terrorist group that controls territory in Syria and Iraq and has recently projected violence to Ankara, Beirut, Paris and San Bernardino, Calif. A soft-spoken double-amputee sometimes carried to meetings by fellow gunmen, Mr. Aboud is an Islamic State commander who also directs a network of assassins, including those who killed Darraji, a former subordinate, with bullets and flame.
The recording of his singing circulated among past associates this year. A taunting dark requiem, it serves as evidence and confession. Mr. Aboud, who defected from Syria’s rebels to the terrorist group in 2014, was admitting to previously unsolved killings of former friends.
“We plucked Adeeb Abbas’s head,” he continued, naming another of his one-time deputies, blasted from a motorcycle by a roadside bomb. “We spilled his filthy blood.”
He then vowed to kill more, as a male chorus chanted to those marked to die: “We will liquidate every traitor.”
Since rising to prominence as an international menace, the Islamic State has tried to glorify its members, describing them as religious warriors who raised arms to protect fellow Sunni Muslims and serve their understanding of God. But the journey of Mr. Aboud, and his recruitment by ISIS, including with cash, departs from scripts emphasizing piety or civil defense.
It is the chronicle of an underground fighter maimed and darkened by his long fight, the biography — replete with rivalries and fratricide — of a proven and once popular Islamist commander whose actions turned more violent and vengeful as he moved into the Islamic State’s orbit.
Mr. Aboud, his former neighbors and associates say, abandoned the defense of his hometown for money, power and the license for viciousness that came with joining the Islamic State. His path resembled not the airbrushed arcs laid out in jihadist propaganda mills but a Middle Eastern mafia tale set against the corrupting effects of war.
The journey from jihadist rank-and-file to feared underground figure was shaped by multiple forces. These include the American invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the oppression of a border-straddling Sunni Muslim population by governments in Damascus and Baghdad. It was further stoked by the indiscriminate killing of civilians by Syrian security forces since 2011, then channeled by the patient plotting of a jihadist organization, once shattered, that revived itself to eclipse Al Qaeda.
Ultimately, his courtship by ISIS offers an unusually detailed look at how the group has selected commanders from a region that has produced uncountable militants since 2003. These chosen men, seduced by gifts and the Islamic State’s gloomy prestige, hold the terrain it needs to support its claim of being a caliphate.
Journalists for The New York Times met Mr. Aboud in Syria in 2013, as he led sieges around isolated army positions that were shelling the civilian population nearby; it was a fight he and the several hundred rebels he led, known as the Dawood Brigade, eventually won.
Sarmin, the town in the lowlands of Idlib Province where he headquartered his brigade, was itself under frequent shelling, and he was moving and accepting meetings with much more caution than many rebel commanders.
The interview was arranged by the son-in-law of his boss, but Mr. Aboud’s supporters had everyone wait in the basement of a mosque for part of the afternoon before leading the group to an abandoned building in the partially evacuated, battle-scarred town.
Mr. Aboud was rushed in from the outside by those who carried him. He had lost fighters in battle the previous day and seemed weary and suspicious of guests. His gray pants had been folded to hide his lower-leg stumps, which he crossed in front of himself as he sat on a cushion. He opened the conversation in a quiet voice, and threatened to kill the journalists if he were misquoted.
Abu Ayman, a bomb-maker who helped carry him into the room, spoke more than Mr. Aboud, who chose his words with care, even when repeating Islamist boilerplate.
He complained about the activities of many secular rebels, describing them as opportunists and profiteers. “There are Free Syrian Army brigades,” Mr. Aboud said, that get weapons and “sell them in trade.” He asserted, again speaking softly, that Syria was being plunged into sectarian war by Iran and those it underwrites, including the Syrian government and Hezbollah. “Iran is seeking to re-establish the Persian empire, to get control over the whole Middle East,” he said.
Immediately after the conversation, he was picked up, carried swiftly outside and set on the front passenger seat of a muddy S.U.V., which sped away.
The Times returned to the Turkish-Syrian border after his defection and vendetta killings to interview those who worked with him closely.
Today Mr. Aboud, in his mid-30s, is an exile from Sarmin, where he had lived most of his adult life. Past associates refer to him as either an ISIS wali or emir, titles conveying authority or military power that the Islamic State bestows on governors and its middle rank.
They note that he did not simply drift to ISIS; he has had a relationship with the original underground Sunni insurgents in Iraq’s Anbar Province, part of the crucible where ISIS formed, reaching back more than a decade.
Mr. Aboud and one of his brothers fought American forces there in 2004 and 2005, several townspeople said. Some suggested that the pair returned to Syria as a sleeper cell tied to Al Qaeda in Iraq, which was founded by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and after his death in 2006 eventually became ISIS.
In the nearly year and a half since Mr. Aboud publicly joined the Islamic State, taking with him most of his fighters and many powerful weapons, he has been credited with, or blamed for, a sprawling mix of battlefield action and crime. Those who know him contend he led the capture of Palmyra, the town and ancient heritage site that ISIS defiled.
For all of Mr. Aboud’s activity, however, his story suggests limits to advancement within the group, which analysts say to a large degree remains led by Iraqis, including many connected to the dismantled Baathist regime of Saddam Hussein.
Hassan al-Dugheim, a rebel cleric who said he had observed Mr. Aboud since 2011, said his tactical skill and ruthlessness were beyond question. He bluntly added, however, that he considered Mr. Aboud stupid, and that the Islamic State had found in him a man who could be flattered, bought, then used.
“Syrians are for fighting,” he said, and those who had joined ISIS recently faced a glass ceiling inside. “They are like animals to be ridden, like a horse or a mule.”
Bernie Sanders’s loss in the Nevada caucuses, 47 percent to 53 percent, reveals a very real weakness of his insurgent challenge to Hillary Clinton.
According to entrance polls — which may have had some problems of their own, problems that we’ll discuss shortly — Sanders’s appeal is not broad enough among key groups that traditionally make up the base of the Democratic Party.
He lost among women, blacks, nonwhites, and self-described Democrats. But the loss was even more troubling for his camp than that. He also lost highly educated caucusgoers with postgraduate degrees, both the poorest and wealthiest groups, and moderates. He lost those who saw health care and the economy as the most important issues of the election, even though those are key parts of Sanders’s platform and issues on which he is most eloquent and persuasive.
And perhaps most interestingly, he lost overwhelmingly among people who wanted a candidate who could win in November. Good for him though, only 18 percent of those polled thought electability was the top quality a candidate needed to possess. You only have to look at the Republican winner in South Carolina to understand that this is not an electability cycle, this is a anti-establishment, point-making cycle.
The map going forward has states that look a lot more like Nevada than those that look like Iowa and New Hampshire, where Sanders performed well. Indeed, there are many states like South Carolina, which will hold its Democratic primary Saturday, that look even worse for Sanders than Nevada.
That is because of the narrowness of Sanders’s winning demographics, as demonstrated in Nevada.
Let’s explore some of the positives for Sanders, the groups among which he won. He won liberals, of which there were many, and independents, of which there were few. He won people under 40, particularly those under 24, and whites with no college degree. He also won people who said their most important issue was income inequality and believed that the most important quality was having a candidate who cares about people like them or who was honest and trustworthy.
According to the entrance poll, Sanders also won the Hispanic vote, but this is where some prominent poll watchers took exception to the poll’s accuracy.
The New York Times’s Nate Cohn tweeted:
“Based on the results in Clark, the precincts in ELV, and the overall entrance poll error, I do not believe Sanders won the Hispanic vote.”
ELV, or East Las Vegas, is the largely Hispanic part of Clark County, by far the most populous county in the state, where actual results showed Clinton winning handily.
Nate Silver tweeted support for Cohn’s analysis:
“We share @nate cohn skepticism about entrance poll finding that Clinton lost Hispanics in Nevada.”
It is true that Sanders’s message may have more resonance with Hispanic voters than with other nonwhite groups, because Hispanic voters skew younger.
According to a Pew Research Center report published in January:
“Hispanic millennials will account for nearly half (44 percent) of the record 27.3 million Hispanic eligible voters projected for 2016 — a share greater than any other racial or ethnic group of voters, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of U.S. Census Bureau data.”
But young black voters are not yet “feeling the Bern” to the same degree that other millennials are, as a poll published last week in The Washington Post pointed out. According to the accompanying article:
“Much has been made of Sanders’s popularity with younger voters, and Clinton’s struggles to connect with millennials. Among black voters age 18-29, the gap between Sanders and Clinton is indeed narrower. But younger black voters still rate Clinton more favorably than Sanders.”
But the poll points out an even bigger problem for Sanders among black voters than millennials, and that’s his lack of support among black women who “comprise a disproportionate segment of the black electorate.”
As the Post pointed out in no uncertain terms:
“A Democratic victory in the general election requires enthusiastic support from black women, and black women are significantly more enthusiastic about Clinton than Sanders.”
It is very hard to see how Sanders wins the nomination without winning the black and Hispanic vote in the Southern and Western states, not to mention New York and Michigan.
Lastly, the political revolution on which Sanders has hinged his ability to accomplish his ambitious plan keeps failing to materialize. This year’s Democratic caucus participation was down nearly a third from 2008, and in Iowa and New Hampshire there were more voters — or caucusgoers — making choices in the Republican contest than in the Democratic one.
As Sanders told “Meet the Press” about the Nevada loss: “We did not do as good a job as I had wanted to bring out a large turnout.”
That doesn’t sound like a political revolution to me.
Bernie Sanders, eager to bounce back from his loss Saturday in the Nevada caucuses, pointedly attacked Hillary Clinton on Monday, arguing that she was copying his message and that she might be improperly influenced by Wall Street donations to her candidacy.
Though the Vermont senator has repeatedly said he wants to avoid a negative campaign, Mr. Sanders delivered one of his most striking critiques of Mrs. Clinton yet, accusing her of mirroring his style and highlighting their differences on the campaign finance system and trade policies. The comments come as Mr. Sanders is fighting to prove he can remain viable in the race, which will mean broadening his support beyond the thousands of young people and working-class whites that pack his events.
“I have to say that I am delighted that Secretary Clinton, month after month after month, seems to be adopting more and more of the positions that we have advocated. That’s good,” Mr. Sanders said, adding that Mrs. Clinton was “beginning to use a lot of the language and phraseology that we have used.”
“In fact, I think I saw a TV ad and thought it was me. But it turned out it was Secretary Clinton’s picture in the end,” Mr. Sanders said at a news conference at an ironworkers union office in Boston.
Mr. Sanders went on to imply that Mrs. Clinton’s stances on issues were not as genuine as his own.
“But the people of Massachusetts and the people of the United States need to know the difference between hastily adopted campaign rhetoric and the real record and long-held ideas of the candidates,” Mr. Sanders said.
Mr. Sanders has said that the Iowa caucuses, where Mrs. Clinton narrowly beat him, and the New Hampshire primary, where Mr. Sanders won by double digits, proves that his message of a rigged economy is resonating with voters. However, Mrs. Clinton’s victory in the Nevada caucuses on Saturday delivered a blow to Mr. Sanders’s momentum and raised questions about how much longer he can remain in the race.
The Democratic delegate count so far shows Mr. Sanders slipping significantly behind Mrs. Clinton.
Without directly accusing Mrs. Clinton of being influenced by Wall Street money, Mr. Sanders pointed out that Priorities USA Action, the “super PAC” that is supporting Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign, raised $25 million during the last reporting period from special interest groups, including $15 million from Wall Street.
“Now I know that every candidate who has ever received special interest money always says that the millions and millions of dollars they have received will never influence them. Never, never, never,” Mr. Sanders said. “Well, the American people need to ask a very simple question: If these contributions from Wall Street and other powerful special interests have no influence over the candidate, why are these special interests making huge campaign contributions?”
“Simple question. Now maybe they are dummies. And maybe they just think they throw millions of dollars and expect to get nothing. Maybe. I doubt that very much.”
On Tuesday morning, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign responded to Mr. Sanders’s attacks.
“How revolutionary: after a loss in Nevada and facing an uphill climb in South Carolina, Bernie Sanders is breaking his campaign pledge once again to trot out old, tired attacks on Hillary Clinton,” said Christina Reynolds, a spokeswoman for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign.
Donald J. Trump said Monday that he would release his tax returns “at some point, probably,” after the radio host Hugh Hewitt pressed Mr. Trump about when he would make them available, warning that delaying in doing so had damaged Mitt Romney’s campaign in 2012.
“When do we get tax returns, Donald Trump, because Mitt Romney got killed on this four years ago,” Mr. Hewitt said in an interview with Mr. Trump, according to a transcript provided by his aides. “”And you’ve got to get them out there as well.”
“Well, we’ll get them out at some point, probably,” Mr. Trump said. “I mean, I’m looking at it. I told my people the other day, start looking at it.”
His returns, he added, “are among the largest. I’m audited all the time by government. And I think every single year, I’ve had an audit for years. And you know, other people, friends of mine say they never get audited. I say congratulations. I have audits every year. So it’s, you know, one of those things. But we are working. They’re very complex papers, but we’re working on it.”
Mr. Hewitt pressed on, “Will we get them soon, do you think?”
“I don’t know,” Mr. Trump replied. “I have to ask my accounting people. But we’ll be working on it. Everything is very much, you know, I gave my financials ahead of schedule, much ahead of schedule. I had a long time to give them, and I gave them immediately. And they were very complex, also, and very big, and they turned out to be extremely good, much better, actually, than people thought.”
Mr. Romney, who was a private equity executive before he was elected governor of Massachusetts, was savaged by a “super PAC” supporting President Obama, with campaign ads calling him a heartless corporate raider. Mr. Romney did not release his tax returns until the September before the general election that year, when more people were paying attention. They showed he paid an effective tax rate of less than 15 percent. He had faced months of pressure to release the returns.
On the eve of Tuesday’s Republican caucuses in Nevada, where he is expected to do well, Mr. Trump also told Mr. Hewitt that he does not like the caucus system, which relies heavily on organizing and is more complex than a primary system.
“I just think the caucus system throws wrinkles in it,” said Mr. Trump, who finished second to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas in the Iowa caucuses. “I really don’t believe it’s a good system. You know, I like to have a person walk in, vote and leave, as opposed to walk in, sit around, and who knows what happens. So you know, that’s my preference, but let’s see. I mean, we should be in pretty good shape tomorrow.”
In that regard, Mr. Trump has something in common with Hillary Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, who have criticized the caucus system in the past for similar reasons.
Gov. John Kasich’s campaign said on Monday that it had gained another billionaire supporter: the hedge fund titan Julian H. Robertson Jr.
Mr. Robertson, who founded Tiger Management, will help raise money for the campaign, Chris Schrimpf, a spokesman for Mr. Kasich, said. On Sunday, the Ohio governor’s campaign said it had won the support of another billionaire investor, Stanley F. Druckenmiller.
“We are really seeing a good response from donors who know that Governor Kasich is the party’s best choice not just to win in November but to actually run the country,” Mr. Schrimpf said on Monday, which Mr. Kasich spent campaigning in Virginia.
Since Saturday’s South Carolina primary, in which Mr. Kasich finished fifth, his campaign has rolled out a flurry of new donors and endorsements in an effort to show the viability of his campaign.
His newly announced supporters include Tom Ridge, the former governor of Pennsylvania and homeland security secretary, and William F. Weld, the former governor of Massachusetts.
Mr. Robertson could not be reached for comment on Monday. Last year he gave $1.1 million to a “super PAC” supporting former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, who quit the race on Saturday after his fourth-place finish in South Carolina.
In August, Mr. Robertson gave $25,000 to a group supporting Mr. Kasich’s presidential bid. Last year he also gave $50,000 to a group backing the short-lived bid of Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, although most of that money was later refunded.
Mr. Kasich, while eager to win the support of billionaires, has been critical of the campaign financing system under which they have big influence.
“This whole business that billionaires can determine who’s going to be president of the United States needs to be changed,” he said at a town hall-style forum here on Monday. “This is the goofiest system, too. It’s not the right way to do things.”
Megyn Kelly will host a two-hour “voters summit” broadcast special on Wednesday, but Donald J. Trump won’t be joining her.
Mr. Trump, the leading Republican candidate, declined to participate in the panel, scheduled for the night before the next Republican debate, citing the last-minute invitation and prior commitments.
“The campaign has a previous engagement in Virginia and then New York, which could not be rescheduled,” Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for the campaign, said in a statement. “Given this was just proposed at the last minute it was not possible to change our plans in order to attend. Mr. Trump looks forward to participating in the next Fox News debate.”
In order to quell any rumors that Mr. Trump’s declining was because of lingering animosity — he has harshly criticized her in the past — Ms. Kelly took to Twitter on Monday night.
“Trump’s team is correct-we only scheduled this last-minute,” she wrote on Twitter. “They were very polite & we’re happy we’ll see him in MI.”
The prime-time special, “The Kelly File: Face to Face With Candidates,” will be broadcast from Houston, the site of the debate on Thursday. It will feature one-on-one interviews with the other Republican candidates.
Ben Carson and Ted Cruz will do the interviews live; John Kasich and Marco Rubio will join by satellite.
Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders are seeking to appeal to their core constituencies — she to women and he to young people — as they seek votes from African-Americans in South Carolina.
The divide was on vivid display Monday afternoon at the Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church here, as five mothers in the Black Lives Matter movement spoke powerfully about their support for Mrs. Clinton – including one who had some words for her granddaughter, who is backing Mr. Sanders.
Gwen Carr, whose son Eric Garner was killed when a New York City police officer put him in a chokehold in 2014, described her son’s death during a Clinton campaign event here and praised Mrs. Clinton for devoting time listening to her and promising to overhaul the criminal justice system.
Referring to police officers and her son, Ms. Carr said, “They would have never done that to him, if he was a white Eric Garner in the suburbs.”
“This racial profiling, it has to stop. We all have to be treated like human beings,” Ms. Carr said to an audience of about 25 people, mostly older African-American women. “We know that all lives matter, but we have to make them understand that our life is just as important as anyone else’s life. Hillary Clinton understands this.”
Ms. Carr’s granddaughter, Erica Garner, who is Eric Garner’s oldest child, campaigned for Mr. Sanders in South Carolina last week and introduced him at a rally at the University of South Carolina. Ms. Garner also made an endorsement video that included footage of her father’s death on a Staten Island sidewalk. Parts of that video are used in a Sanders campaign commercial running in South Carolina, in which Ms. Garner hails Mr. Sanders as “a protester” and says he is “not scared to go up against the criminal justice system.”
Ms. Carr, asked about her granddaughter’s position, smiled warmly and said she hoped young people wouldn’t become caught up in the Sanders movement without looking closely at both candidates.
“You know how young people are,” Ms. Carr said. “Sometimes they get fed something and they believe it. The only thing I can say is, do your research. Do your research and then make your decision. Don’t make your decision because your friend and peers are doing this. Look at Bernie and what Bernie has done. Look at Hillary’s track record and see how it weighs out.”
Mrs. Clinton was not at the event; she was off the campaign trail attending fund-raisers on Monday. But Ms. Carr and the other women, including the mothers of Trayvon Martin and Sandra Bland, are speaking at events for Mrs. Clinton around the state on Monday and Tuesday.
Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, are popular with many African-Americans, who are expected to make up about half of the Democratic primary electorate here on Saturday. But Mr. Sanders proved far more popular with college students and voters in their 20s in Nevada, New Hampshire, and Iowa, the first three states that have voted in the Democratic nomination fight. Many of those young Sanders supporters have been white. The South Carolina primary will be the first significant test of Mr. Sanders’s support among young African-American voters.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, is an admirer of Donald J. Trump and has been friends with him for decades. His endorsement could be useful to Mr. Trump, both as an affirmation in national security terms and an appeal to transplanted New Yorkers in Florida and elsewhere.
But while Mr. Giuliani speaks with Mr. Trump regularly, and has done so for months, he does not consider himself an adviser and is not yet ready to endorse any of the candidates.
“I wouldn’t call it advising him,” Mr. Giuliani said in a telephone interview on Monday after a published report suggested he has recently emerged as a key adviser to Mr. Trump. Mr. Giuliani added, “I’m not sure who I’m going to endorse,” though he said he was open to Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, but “not Cruz,” he said, referring to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Mr. Trump’s chief rival so far.
Mr. Giuliani was mayor for eight years and before that the federal prosecutor in Manhattan, where Mr. Trump has been a major figure since the late 1980s.
“I talk to him on a pretty regular basis,” Mr. Giuliani said. “I don’t consider myself an adviser. I’ve talked to Donald for 25 years. So I talk to him a lot anyway.”
Mr. Giuliani said he frequently spoke with Jeb Bush when he was a candidate, about as frequently as he did to Mr. Trump, and that he spoke more frequently with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, with whom he is also friends.
As for Mr. Trump, Mr. Giuliani said he would call and offer his thoughts and advice on a range of topics. “Sometimes he takes it, sometimes he doesn’t,” Mr. Giuliani said. He told Mr. Trump that he thought his statement during his campaign kickoff speech that Mexican immigrants were rapists and were bringing crime into the country “was backwards,” although he thought he had “a pretty good point about illegal immigration.”
He said he also still considered former President George W. Bush “one of my heroes,” and disagreed with Mr. Trump’s assertions that the Bush administration has mishandled the invasion of Iraq in 2003.
But Mr. Giuliani, who was heralded for his leadership after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and ran for president himself in 2008, said Mr. Trump had made a valuable case about China’s currency manipulation. He said he also valued what Mr. Trump had said about the terrorism threats of the Islamic State.
Mr. Trump and Mr. Rubio are “more flexible people” than Mr. Cruz, Mr. Giuliani said. “They’re not rigid ideologues.”
He added of Mr. Trump, “You don’t succeed in business by being a rigid ideologue.”
Gov. John Kasich of Ohio responded forcefully on Monday to a claim by Senator Marco Rubio’s campaign that Mr. Kasich had no realistic way to win the Republican presidential nomination.
Mr. Kasich burst out laughing when asked about the Rubio campaign’s analysis, which amounted to a suggestion that Mr. Kasich should clear the way for Mr. Rubio.
“I think it’s funny,” he told reporters. “I think it’s ridiculous.” He added that he does not “take orders from K Street.”
“I’ve challenged the establishment my entire career, and they don’t like it,” Mr. Kasich said after holding a town-hall-style forum here at George Mason University. “They want to get somebody they can be comfortable with.”
Mr. Rubio’s campaign released a memo on Sunday that said Mr. Kasich “has no path to the nomination.”
Mr. Kasich has made a point of not criticizing other candidates, and he made sure to note he was not “disparaging” Mr. Rubio. But he noted that Mr. Rubio had finished in fifth place in New Hampshire, compared with his second-place showing. And he seemed to draw a contrast with Mr. Rubio, who has been criticized as being overly scripted, by describing the forum he held here.
“I didn’t have a script, I didn’t have a teleprompter, I took robust numbers of questions, and that’s what I’m going to continue to do,” Mr. Kasich said. Indeed, Mr. Kasich drew criticism with a comment he made about how, decades ago, he first won election to the State Legislature in Ohio with the help of “women who left their kitchens” to campaign for him.
Mr. Kasich also complained that he had not received much coverage from the news media until recently.
“You people would have taken bets, you never would have bet on me,” he told reporters. “And here’s another thing: You gave me no coverage. For a year, you ignored me. And now all the sudden people are beginning to hear me, and I’m going to continue to talk. So how do you like that?”
Mr. Kasich was also asked if he would be interested in being on a ticket with Mr. Rubio, a pairing that one of their former opponents, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, suggested would be formidable, regardless of who had which spot.
“Sure,” Mr. Kasich said. “If he wants to run for vice president with me, that’d be great.”
Senator Ted Cruz’s presidential campaign erupted in turmoil on Monday as Mr. Cruz fired his chief spokesman for spreading a misleading video of Senator Marco Rubio — an ill-timed shake-up for a campaign already under duress on the eve of the Republican caucuses in Nevada.
For Mr. Cruz, who has vigorously defended himself in recent weeks as rivals accused him of running an underhanded race, the episode cuts at the premise of his bid. He has cast himself as the candidate of honesty and integrity, with a faith-based pitch and a backdrop that reads “TrusTed” during speeches.
On Monday, amid persistent sniping from Mr. Rubio and Donald J. Trump about the Cruz campaign’s penchant to mislead, the Texas senator was at last forced to acknowledge his team had gone too far.
At issue was a video of a hotel lobby encounter between Mr. Rubio and a Cruz staff member who had a Bible with him. The video’s subtitles suggested Mr. Rubio had said there were “not many answers” in the Bible. Mr. Cruz’s communications director, Rick Tyler, posted the video on Facebook and Twitter on Sunday, needling Mr. Rubio for an “awkward remark.”
In fact, Mr. Rubio had said the Bible had “all the answers.”
Mr. Cruz said Monday that he had spent the morning investigating the episode.
“I have made clear in this campaign that we will conduct this campaign with the very highest standards of integrity,” he told reporters during a news conference in Las Vegas, describing his decision to request Mr. Tyler’s resignation.
He called Mr. Tyler a “good man,” but said that his sharing of the video was “a grave error in judgment.”
“Even if it was true, we are not a campaign that is going to question the faith of another candidate,” Mr. Cruz said. “Even if it was true, our campaign should not have sent it.”
Mr. Cruz took no questions about Mr. Tyler before making a hasty exit.
The campaign’s self-inflicted drama came as Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio, who edged past him in South Carolina, strained to emerge as the chief challenger to Mr. Trump. The two are also tussling over evangelical support, which is particularly essential to Mr. Cruz, making the dust-up over a remark about the Bible especially tense.
But Mr. Tyler’s dismissal, and Mr. Cruz’s acknowledgment of a campaign misstep, were a clear boon to Mr. Rubio on another front, creating the kind of cudgel that could prove powerful at a crucial stage of the race.
It represents a public admission of what Mr. Rubio and Mr. Trump have angrily asserted for weeks: that Mr. Cruz has employed deceitful tactics to undermine his rivals, including a photograph doctored by his aides that suggested Mr. Rubio was shaking hands with President Obama in front of the Capitol in Washington.
After Mr. Tyler’s dismissal, Mr. Rubio’s team moved quickly to focus attention on his boss.
“Rick is a really good spokesman who had the unenviable task of working for a candidate willing to do or say anything to get elected,” said Mr. Rubio’s spokesman, Alex Conant. “There is a culture in the Cruz campaign, from top to bottom, that no lie is too big and no trick too dirty. Rick did the right thing by apologizing to Marco. It’s high time for Ted Cruz to do the right thing and stop the lies.”
Mr. Trump has, less credibly, attacked Mr. Cruz on similar grounds, threatening a defamation suit over an ad reminding voters of his past support for abortion rights. He was likewise eager to seize on Monday’s news.
“Wow, Ted Cruz falsely suggested Marco Rubio mocked the Bible and was just forced to fire his Communications Director,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. “More dirty tricks!”
Privately, Mr. Cruz’s advisers have acknowledged that perceptions about his integrity had taken a toll since his victory in Iowa. On caucus night, his team spread word to voters — with a liberal interpretation of a CNN report — that Ben Carson planned to suspend his campaign.
The mild-mannered Mr. Carson, widely admired even by non-supporters, seethed with anger, and much of the Republican field came to his defense.
Days earlier, Mr. Cruz had earned a rebuke from Iowa’s secretary of state for mailers that accused residents of nonexistent “voter violations.”
As the race reached South Carolina, Mr. Rubio’s team assailed Mr. Cruz and his allies for myriad alleged mistruths. After a legal review, some television stations in South Carolina pulled an ad from a pro-Cruz “super PAC” that had criticized Mr. Rubio’s record on immigration. Mr. Cruz also faced criticism from National Right to Life for what it called “inaccurate and misleading” remarks about Mr. Rubio’s record on abortion.
There have been lesser unforced errors, as when Mr. Cruz pulled one of his campaign ads after learning that an actress in it had a prior career in soft-core pornography.
Mr. Cruz, once one of the most broadly popular candidates in the field, has seen his favorability ratings slip as the race has taken a sharply negative turn. A Monmouth University poll of South Carolina Republicans showed Mr. Cruz with a 45 percent favorability rating and a 39 percent unfavorable rating, a steep fall from November figures of 52 and 21.
The latest episode is unlikely to help, even as Mr. Cruz’s team made clear it was moving on. Shortly after the announcement, the campaign circulated a memo arguing Mr. Cruz is “the only candidate who can defeat Donald Trump.”
Bob Vander Plaats, an Iowa evangelical activist and national co-chairman for Mr. Cruz, said the senator was determined to show his campaign operated at “the highest level of integrity,” after weeks of accusations from rivals.
Mr. Vander Plaats said he believed Mr. Tyler’s misstep would not have been a major controversy, if not for recent history.
“At another time, it’s probably not a big deal, but this time it’s a big deal,” Mr. Vander Plaats said, adding, “I love Rick, but it’s something that probably had to be done.”
After posting the video about Mr. Rubio and the Bible on Sunday morning, Mr. Tyler apologized late that night. “I would not knowingly post a false story,” he wrote on Facebook, adding that the initial article, from the University of Pennsylvania’s student newspaper, The Daily Pennsylvanian, had misquoted Mr. Rubio in its video. “But the fact remains that I did post it when I should have checked its accuracy first. I regret the mistake.”
Earlier on Monday, Mr. Rubio said he had accepted Mr. Tyler’s apology, but raised questions about the “accountability” of the Cruz campaign.
Mr. Tyler had been scheduled to be interviewed on MSNBC moments before Mr. Cruz began his news conference about the move, the cable network said. Mr. Tyler left abruptly just before his planned appearance, Kate Snow, the news anchor, wrote in an email to colleagues. Calls to Mr. Tyler were not returned.
Though Mr. Tyler, a former top aide to Newt Gingrich, was not a longtime member of Mr. Cruz’s orbit like some other advisers, he was one of the earliest hires for the campaign and was known for his colorful quotes and aggressive attacks on rivals. He attained a level of cult status in 2011 for a creative news release in praise of Mr. Gingrich, which was later the subject of a dramatic reading by John Lithgow on “The Colbert Report.”
“The literati sent out their minions to do their bidding,” it began, before a flourish on the “billowing smoke and dust of tweets and trivia” from which Mr. Gingrich had emerged unscathed.
But in this campaign, Mr. Tyler had a tendency at times to get ahead of Mr. Cruz. When Sarah Palin was expected to endorse Mr. Trump last month, Mr. Tyler said the move would damage her and her reputation as a conservative champion. Mr. Cruz later said he would not have been a senator without her help.
Until now, though, Mr. Cruz had vigorously defended his team, instead accusing journalists or rival campaigns of seeking to generate controversy at his expense.
On Monday, Mr. Cruz did not entirely abandon the instinct to hit back, suggesting that Mr. Rubio was seeking to deflect attention from his record.
“They have a long record they’ve earned in South Carolina for engaging in this kind of trickery, of impugning the integrity of whoever their opponent is to distract attention,” Mr. Cruz said. “We are going to remain focused on issues.”
Recalling his earliest days in politics on Monday, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio said that he first won election to the State Legislature thanks in large part to “women who left their kitchens” to campaign for him.
“How did I get elected? I didn’t have anybody for me,” he said at a town-hall-style forum at George Mason University. “We just got an army of people — and many women who left their kitchens to go out and go door to door and to put yard signs up for me, all the way back when, you know, things were different.”
Mr. Kasich was elected to the Ohio Senate in 1978, when he was 26.
“Now you call homes and everybody’s out working,” Mr. Kasich added. “But at that time, early days, it was an army of the women that really helped me to get elected to the State Senate.”
Later, a nursing student noted his earlier comment before asking him about his support for legislation stripping funding from Planned Parenthood in Ohio, which he signed on Sunday.
“First off,” the student said. “I want to say, your comment earlier about the women came out of the kitchen to support you — I’ll come to support you, but I won’t be coming out of the kitchen.”
“I gotcha, I gotcha,” Mr. Kasich said.
Mr. Kasich’s remark immediately drew criticism, and his campaign later issued a statement addressing his remark.
The Ohio Democratic Party issued a news release with the title, “Kasich Gives Don Draper a Run for His Money,” referring to the “Mad Men” character.
Dawn Laguens, an official with the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, called his comment “flat-out insulting” and said his “condescending attitude toward women needs to stop.”
And Ilyse Hogue, the president of Naral Pro-Choice America, said, “When I heard John Kasich’s latest offensive views on women and our rights, I almost dropped the casserole I was taking out of the oven!”
Hillary Clinton’s campaign also responded to his comment, posting on Twitter: “It’s 2016. A woman’s place is … wherever she wants it to be.”
Asked later Monday about the Twitter post by Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, Mr. Kasich told reporters, “I completely agree”
Before an event at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Mr. Kasich said the town-hall-style meetings he now holds on the campaign trail used to be in kitchens and living rooms, and said women have played a large role in his political career. He noted that his campaign manager, his lone appointment to Ohio’s Supreme Court, and his lieutenant governor are all women.
“Everybody’s just got to relax,” Mr. Kasich said, adding that he was “not a scripted candidate.”
“I’m real,” he said, “and maybe sometimes I might say something that isn’t artfully said as well as it should be, but, you know, I’m kind of a real guy, and I think people want authenticity, and I’m going to continue to be authentic, and every once in a while I’ll have to go back and make sure people know what I really mean when I say something.”
Mr. Kasich, who has received less attention than some other Republican candidates, said the criticism on Monday suggested that “somebody’s listening out there” to him.
“So I’ll be a little bit more careful, but I’ll continue to operate, you know, on a high wire without a net,” he said, “and frankly I’d like to see everybody who’s running for president get out of the scripted role and start to be real and take questions.”
The diversity of Marco Rubio’s political team in South Carolina was so striking that his campaign boasted they were the face of the new conservative movement. Mr. Rubio, a Cuban-American, Gov. Nikki Haley, an Indian-American, and Senator Tim Scott, who is black, were like a Republican Benetton ad, as Ms. Haley joked at every event.
But in Nevada, where Mr. Rubio is competing in the state’s caucuses on Tuesday, that diversity is noticeably absent.
As he boarded his campaign plane for a day of rallying voters in the northern reaches of the state, his entourage was nearly all white and male.
There was Dean Heller, the state’s Republican senator, and the lieutenant governor, Mark Hutchison. Representative Jason Chaffetz of neighboring Utah was along for the ride too. Representative Mark Amodei, who represents a district in this northern Nevada region, was scheduled to link up with them later in the day.
The dearth of brown or black faces might seem surprising for a state that has such a large Hispanic population, not to mention its fair share of blacks.
But the biggest fish in the race, the state’s Hispanic Republican governor, Brian Sandoval, is so far uncommitted.
In a religious sense, however, his Nevada team is somewhat less conventional than the usual Republican lot. Mr. Heller, Mr. Hutchison and Mr. Chaffetz are all Mormon, as was Mr. Rubio for a brief time when his parents moved his family to Las Vegas for six years before returning to Miami.
Representative Kevin McCarthy, a Republican from California and the House majority leader, said on Monday that he would be able to work with Donald J. Trump as the party’s presidential nominee, the latest signal of acceptance from national figures of the billionaire real estate developer.
“I think I’ll work with Donald Trump,” Mr. McCarthy said on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” program, adding, “I think I can work with anyone that comes out to be the nominee.”
That includes Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who helped egg on a government shutdown over efforts to defund President Obama’s signature health care law, according to Mr. McCarthy.
While Mr. McCarthy’s comments were hardly a ringing endorsement of Mr. Trump, they were not an expression of concern about the impact that the first-time candidate could have on the party’s chances at taking back the White House or holding its majority in the Senate.
The shock and awe of a New York real estate developer-turned-reality television star’s winning the South Carolina Republican primary on Saturday night blotted out the other major, parallel story of Hillary Clinton’s victory in the Nevada caucuses.
Mrs. Clinton, depending on how delegates are allocated in Clark County, will end up with more pledged delegates from the caucuses than Senator Bernie Sanders. That would give her a lead not just in pledged delegates, which are won in states, but in superdelegates as well. A lead in both categories eluded her in the 2008 race against Barack Obama, and, if it holds through Super Tuesday and beyond, it would render moot some of the complaints against her from progressive groups. And the results in Nevada, just as the final numbers in Iowa did, vindicated for many in the Clinton orbit the approach and style of Robby Mook, her campaign manager, who faced a barrage of questions heading into those contests.
As for the Republicans, it is their turn to head to Nevada, where Donald J. Trump owns a hotel and has a commanding lead. Caucuses did not favor Mr. Trump in Iowa, where organization mattered a great deal and where his campaign was not well prepared. Nevada, as well as the Super Tuesday states, will be another big test of his ability to organize.
But despite some signs of weakness that showed in South Carolina in his base of support, Republicans who oppose Mr. Trump are increasingly fearful that, with a divided field of candidates heading into the Super Tuesday states, he is strong enough to emerge successful. The only person who might be able to stop Mr. Trump is Mr. Trump, by virtue of an eruption or provocation so far unforeseen.
Mr. Trump seemed to try hard, almost inadvertently, to damage himself, particularly in the final week before South Carolina voted. None of it stopped him.
The Senate returns on Monday to a political environment considerably changed from when they left 10 days ago for the holiday break.
The death of Justice Antonin Scalia and President Obama’s stated intention to nominate a replacement have injected a volatile new element into the Senate just as Republicans and Democrats were trying to work together to pass bipartisan legislation on criminal justice, energy policy and an escalating drug crisis.
Now the bitter dispute over whether Senate Republicans are willing to even take up the nomination is likely to spill over into the other items on the Senate agenda, as both sides eye each other warily.
While they cannot force the nomination through, given their minority status, Democrats believe they have the upper hand politically, with Republicans forced to defend their position not to act even though Mr. Obama has almost 11 months remaining in his term. But Republicans believe they would face a backlash from their conservative base if they gave Mr. Obama a final-year chance to reshape the court.
One of the first orders of business will be the annual reading of George Washington’s farewell address, in observance of his birthday. In it, he laments the rise of factions and political parties as a threat to the new government’s ability to get things done.
“All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to direct, control, counteract or awe the regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of fatal tendency,” Washington wrote. “They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and extraordinary force; to put, in the place of the delegated will of the nation the will of a party.”
In an effort to dispute what they say is a false narrative that union voters are closely split between Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, a group of more than 20 unions representing more than 10 million workers released a statement on Monday reaffirming support for Mrs. Clinton.
“Secretary Clinton has proven herself as the fighter and champion working people and their families need in the White House,” says the statement, which was embraced by several large unions, including the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, the American Federation of Teachers, and the Service Employees International Union. “That is why, of all unions endorsing a candidate in the Democratic primary, the vast majority of the membership in these unions has endorsed her.”
The statement is partly a reaction to the aftermath of the announcement by the A.F.L.-C.I.O., a federation of unions, that it would not vote during its executive council meeting this week on whether to endorse a candidate in the Democratic presidential primaries, essentially postponing an endorsement until the primaries are no longer competitive.
“I have concluded that there is broad consensus for the A.F.L.-C.I.O. to remain neutral in the presidential primaries for the time being,” Richard L. Trumka, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, said in an email to union officials last week.
Supporters of Mr. Sanders argued that the decision not to hold an endorsement vote reflected substantial enthusiasm for him among rank and file union voters, even within unions that had already endorsed Mrs. Clinton.
“I would say over all that union members are divided,” said Larry Cohen, a senior adviser to Mr. Sanders and past president of the Communications Workers of America.
“It’s significant given where we were last spring that we’re now at a point that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is not coordinating a campaign in the primaries, that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. would essentially be encouraging members to be active for whichever candidate they support.”
But leaders of prominent unions backing Mrs. Clinton say this is a misreading of the federation’s decision. “The A.F.L.-C.I.O. virtually never endorses in primaries,” said Randi Weingarten, the president of the 1.6-million member American Federation of Teachers.
“Because there’s now a story where there should not have been one — certain people in the Bernie camp wanted to take advantage of it — the unions that endorsed Hillary want to make really clear to people that we are incredibly supportive of her.”
The A.F.L.-C.I.O. endorsed Vice President Al Gore in October 1999, shortly before he competed against former Senator Bill Bradley in the 2000 Democratic primaries. It endorsed Senator John Kerry in February 2004, after Mr. Kerry had piled up victories in more than a dozen contests, including the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, and appeared on his way to the nomination though he still faced a challenge from Senator John Edwards. (Mr. Edwards finished unexpectedly close to Mr. Kerry in the Wisconsin primary shortly before the federation’s endorsement that year.)
In 2008, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. did not endorse a Democratic candidate — Barack Obama — until June, by which point Mr. Obama had already effectively captured the nomination over Mrs. Clinton.
To win an endorsement, a candidate must get the support of unions representing at least two-thirds of the federation’s 9.3 million members. Mrs. Clinton was roughly one million votes shy of this total at the time the federation decided to abandon the process last week, according to two sources briefed on the decision.
In addition to the problem of basic math, these sources said, at least one president of a major union supporting Mrs. Clinton urged aborting the process out of fear that pushing forward with a vote could be divisive. Others worried that a vote could divide the labor movement more broadly.
“I do believe it would not be beneficial to push the issue,” said Lee Saunders, president of the 1.6-million member American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, or Afscme, which has also endorsed Mrs. Clinton and was part of the joint statement. “Everyone will have to come together when there’s a Democratic candidate.”
In truth, both sides have evidence to back up their claims about the state of the race among union voters. Mrs. Clinton has the endorsement of 23 unions, versus three for Mr. Sanders, and the unions that have endorsed her represent more members than all the unions in the A.F.L.-C.I.O. (Some large unions, like the two-million member Service Employees International Union, are not part of the federation.)
Exit and entrance polls from the Iowa and Nevada caucuses showed voters from union households favoring Mrs. Clinton over Mrs. Sanders by a roughly 10-point margin — greater than the margin by which Mrs. Clinton won those contests overall.
Still, that 10-point margin — assuming it is correct, which is not necessarily assured — may reflect a narrowing of the gap between the two candidates among union members since last fall. In the three polls that Afscme conducted between last May and October, more than 60 percent of its Democratic members consistently backed Mrs. Clinton, versus no more than 20 percent who backed Mr. Sanders.
It is impossible to know the margins by which members of specific unions voted for Mrs. Clinton in this year’s early primary contests, but other evidence suggests significant pockets of support for Mr. Sanders. The Afscme council in Washington State endorsed him in January, and a prominent service employees union local in New Hampshire endorsed him in November.
Ms. Weingarten suggested that some of the blame for confusion about the level of labor support for Mrs. Clinton resided with the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which she said had given the impression that a Clinton endorsement might be imminent in the run-up to this week’s meeting, and to a similar meeting last summer.
She pointed out that many unions were increasingly forming ad hoc alliances outside the federation to work on key issues, like pensions and the ability of unions to collect fees from nonmembers.
“The traditional role the A.F.L. is supposed to have is marshaling all this energy, and they’re not doing it, we’re doing it ourselves,” she said. “This in some ways is just more of that. Frankly I’m surprised the A.F.L. put itself in position, both in July and now, where they were creating an expectation that was never there.”
ou attended a Bernie Sanders rally this summer, when his seemingly quixotic Presidential campaign began gathering force, you might have noticed a few surprising things about the crowd. One was the scarcity of nonwhite faces—a problem that the campaign would soon be confronted by, very publicly. Another was how many young people were turning out to see an irascible seventy-four-year-old senator from Vermont. But that’s a little like being surprised that some millennials appreciate Neil Young or Joni Mitchell at a time when it’s easy to find songs from different decades in a promiscuous jumble online. Young people who like Bernie Sanders like him because he sounds like an old record. He’s been talking about the injustices done to working people by unequal income distribution for more than forty years. His voice, often hoarse from his habitually loud and impassioned speeches, even has the crackle of worn vinyl.
In Portland, Maine, on an evening in July, the line to see Sanders looped around the Cross Insurance Arena. Sanders’s popularity had clearly been exceeding his own expectations. In a conversation this summer, he recalled an event in Minneapolis: “I was blown away. We were driving in, we saw these lines of people snaking down the sidewalk. ‘Jesus, what is that? There’s a ballgame going on?’ ”
At the Portland rally, I met a group of five friends who were drawn to Sanders because of his commitment to banish money from politics: he has sharply criticized the Supreme Court’s 2010 decision, in Citizens United, to permit unlimited campaign spending by corporations, and has lamented the outsize influence exerted by billionaires. Several of the friends praised Sanders’s pledge to raise the federal minimum wage to fifteen dollars an hour. One member of the group, Erin Kiley, a millennial who owns Portland Flea-for-All, a marketplace of vintage and artisanal goods, said that she developed “a huge political crush on Bernie” in 2010, after Sanders delivered an eight-and-a-half-hour speech on the Senate floor to protest the extension of tax cuts instituted during the Presidency of George W. Bush. Sanders’s gruffness, didacticism, and indifference to appearances—both he and his wife, Jane, told me how much he loathes shopping—are central to his appeal. All the friends described Sanders as “authentic,” a word that many people would be hesitant to apply to Hillary Clinton. Kiley acknowledged that Sanders’s unvarnished qualities might turn off some voters, but noted that in the current election cycle “the whole spectrum of candidates is less schmoozy, polished, and warm.” She went on, “Everyone seems a little off the wall. Howard Dean was thrown off the national stage for being angry. But people like Trump because he’s an asshole and says whatever he wants.” Kiley’s friend Dawn York, who runs a vintage-clothing shop, said, “Most candidates are robotic and rehearsed.” She saw “a real person in Bernie.”
Sanders has been known as a democratic socialist for decades. This didn’t matter much to Kiley or York, or to most other Sanders supporters I met during the next few weeks; mainly, they were impressed that he hadn’t shed the term. York thought that, because of Sanders and his “social-media-driven fans,” socialism was “getting a bit of a P.R. makeover.” She noted that sites like Reddit and Twitter were circulating videos of “Bernie explaining why he identifies as a socialist, and what it means to him, in a really positive light.” She added, “The word had a retro connection to Communism and was originally thrown at him as a damning label by his opponents. But for his supporters it isn’t a deterrent.”
A 2011 Pew Research Center survey found that, among voters under the age of thirty, forty-nine per cent had a positive view of socialism. (Only forty-six per cent had a positive view of capitalism.) Peter Dreier, a professor of politics at Occidental College, who has written about Sanders, says that younger voters “may not be willing to entertain a whole new system, but they are open to a pretty profound critique of the current one. They’re not as naïve as Americans used to be during the Cold War—they know that there are varieties of capitalism, that there is social democracy in Scandinavia and Canada, where the government plays a bigger role in regulating corporations and in expanding the safety net.”
At a recent San Francisco gathering for Sanders, I met Derek Zender, a twenty-three-year-old marketing student. He told me that his parents, who live in Orange County, dismissed Sanders as “a decrepit old socialist who means well but doesn’t understand how the world works.” Zender thought they were overlooking the fact that “many American institutions—Social Security, unions, Medicare, the postal service—have elements of socialism.”
In Portland, Sanders took the stage, a little hunched in a gray suit jacket. His flyaway white hair was largely subdued, but his face turned pink with exertion as he delivered an hour-long speech, during which he did not use a teleprompter and barely consulted a sheaf of loose yellow papers on the lectern. “America today is the wealthiest country in the history of the world,” he declared. “But most people don’t know that, most people don’t feel that, most people don’t see that—because almost all of the wealth rests in the hands of a tiny few.” Sanders signals his moral ferocity by choosing words like “horrific” and “abysmal” and sonically italicizing them, as in “This grotesque level of income and wealth inequality is immoral.” He was born in Brooklyn, and his unreconstructed borough growl reminds voters that he stands apart from the “oligarchy.” His hand gestures are as emphatic as a traffic cop’s. When he delivers speeches, he’ll often jab his finger at the lectern, as though he were enumerating the plagues at Passover.
Most of his policy proposals have to do with helping working people and reducing the influence of the wealthy. He would like to break up the big banks, create jobs by rebuilding infrastructure, and move toward public funding of elections—and provide free tuition at public universities. (This program would be subsidized, in part, by a tax on Wall Street speculation.) He wants to end the “international embarrassment of being the only major country on Earth which does not guarantee workers paid medical and family leave.” In the speeches I heard, Sanders rarely discussed foreign policy, though he spoke with conviction about climate change and the need for the U.S. to set an example for Russia, India, and China by using fewer fossil fuels. He tends to sound both doleful and optimistic, like a doctor who has a grave diagnosis to deliver—and no time for small talk—but is convinced that he can help his patient heal.
Huck Gutman, one of Sanders’s close friends, is an English professor at the University of Vermont; from 2008 to 2012, he served as Sanders’s chief of staff in the Senate. “It doesn’t matter what issue comes up—Bernie understands that the fundamental issue for Americans is economic,” Gutman said. “His record on abortion, on gay marriage, on a great number of things has been very good and very liberal, but he never sees those as the central issues. The central issue is: Are people doing O.K., or are a small number of people ripping them off?”
Despite this abiding interest, Sanders does not seem to have immersed himself that deeply in the extensive literature on inequality. When I spoke with him in his Senate office, I asked him how his ideas on economic fairness were formed. “No one can answer that,” he replied. “How were your ideas formed?” He did not particularly warm to discussing the theories of such economists as Joseph Stiglitz and Thomas Piketty. (Gutman told me, “I read a third of Piketty’s book. I don’t think Bernie would read a page of it.” Sanders was interested less in academic arguments, Gutman said, than in hard numbers that “exemplify the disparities he sees and feels and hears about from people.”) Sanders dutifully mentioned that the economist Stephanie Kelton is an adviser to the Democrats on the Senate Budget Committee, of which he is the ranking member, but he was ardent in his admiration for Pope Francis, who has condemned the “economy of exclusion.” Sanders called the Pope “an extraordinary figure,” adding, “My God, he came along right at the time we need him!”
After speeches, Sanders spars about issues with voters or reporters. Garrison Nelson, a political scientist at the University of Vermont, who has known him for decades, says that if Sanders is walking down the street in Burlington “and somebody yells at him Bernie will talk to him—‘What’s the matter? Whadd’ya mean?’ ” He also understands the necessity of the selfie dance, maneuvering quickly into place and smiling briefly. Sanders does not excel, however, at the middle ground of casual, friendly conversation. He has no gift for anecdote. When talking to voters, Hillary Clinton has perfected the head-cocked semblance of keen interest; it’s clear when Sanders becomes bored. Nelson told me, “Bernie’s the last person you’d want to be stuck on a desert island with. Two weeks of lectures about health care, and you’d look for a shark and dive in.” Nelson has voted for him many times.
Paula Routly, who is the publisher of Seven Days, a popular weekly in Burlington, told me a story that captured the counterintuitive Sanders charm. In 2012, she hosted a gathering of alternative-newspaper publishers, and tried to show them Vermont at its most distinctive. One evening, Jerry, of Ben & Jerry’s, scooped ice cream; on another, Senator Sanders stopped by a group dinner. As Routly recalls, “There were no niceties or glad-handing before he launched into a brief but impassioned rant, tailored specifically for our group. He told us we were doing a great job of covering the arts but a lousy one reporting on economic issues. Message delivered—he didn’t want to meet anyone or eat anything or answer any questions. He was out of there.” Everyone loved it. “He only talks to people in one register, but it’s a very effective one,” Routly said.
Though Sanders is steadfastly earnest, the youthful enthusiasm for him often partakes of irony. Whimsical buttons feature the slogan “Feel the Bern,” and Tumblr is full of memes that play up the contrast between Sanders’s age and his popularity with hipsters. It’s similar to the way that some admirers of Ruth Bader Ginsburg have taken to calling her the Notorious R.B.G. Both fandoms combine admiration for progressive conviction with a slightly condescending fondness for cranky senior citizens. Rich Yeselson, a contributing editor at the left-wing journal Dissent, told me, “The sort of detached, post-Jon Stewart generation—they’re the ones putting inverted commas around what Bernie stands for. ‘Look at this grumpy old Jewish socialist from Brooklyn!’ It’s not cynical, though—they really believe in what he’s saying.”
Sanders’s message is particularly potent for young people who are struggling financially. Several weeks after the rally, I wrote to Dawn York, and she said that she had been thinking about “how refreshing it was to have someone point out to us that, as hardworking Americans, some things aren’t a privilege, they are a right. . . . I’m self-employed, I started my own business three and a half years ago, and my husband works full-time for Whole Foods—and we barely get by. We own a home, we both graduated from college, and we work more than forty hours a week, and we can barely put oil in our heating tanks in the winter. We have no savings and no way to financially handle any hiccups that may come our way. And I had to be reminded that it shouldn’t be that way.”
On July 18th in Phoenix, Sanders appeared at Netroots Nation, an annual conference of progressive activists. Before he began his remarks, demonstrators flooded the room and began chanting “Black lives matter!”
After taking the stage, Sanders told the moderator, “Whoa, let me talk about what I want to talk about for a moment!” A few minutes later, when protesters again interrupted the proceedings, he addressed them directly: “Black lives, of course, matter. I spent fifty years of my life fighting for civil rights and for dignity! But if you don’t want me to be here that’s O.K. I don’t want to outscream people.”
A week later, in his Senate office, Sanders sounded chastened. “The issues these young people raised are enormously important,” he said. The video showing the arrest of Sandra Bland, the African-American woman who died in a Texas jail, had just been released, and Sanders seemed shaken. “It impacted my night’s sleep,” he said. “I don’t sleep that great, and it made it even worse.” He went on, “It’s hard to imagine if Sandra Bland was white she would have been thrown to the ground and assaulted and insulted.” Sanders, speaking more broadly about police violence directed at black people, said, “I plead guilty—I should have been more sensitive at the beginning of this campaign to talk about this issue.”
On July 25th, Sanders addressed the annual convention of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, in Baton Rouge. “I’m aware that many of you don’t know me very well,” he said. His tone was friendlier than usual, and he even made a joke: “I was the best and worst congressman Vermont had.” (Vermont has only one.) One of the convention’s listed sponsors was Koch Industries, and it was the first time I saw Sanders give a speech in which he did not inveigh against the company’s billionaire owners, who lavishly support conservative causes. He had folded in a quote from Martin Luther King, Jr., though, which worked well for him: “Now our struggle is for genuine equality, which means economic equality. For we know that it isn’t enough to integrate lunch counters. What does it profit a man to be able to eat at an integrated lunch counter if he doesn’t earn enough money to buy a hamburger and a cup of coffee?”
In August, Sanders’s campaign issued a racial-justice platform that recommended police reform, federal funding for police body cameras, a ban on for-profit prisons, and the elimination of mandatory-minimum jail sentences. The platform also included a broad defense of voting rights. (Among other things, Sanders proposes making Election Day a federal holiday.) The document is divided into sections called “Physical Violence,” “Political Violence,” “Legal Violence,” and “Economic Violence,” strongly echoing the language and priorities of Black Lives Matter. At the same time, the platform reasserted Sanders’s core philosophy: “We must simultaneously address the structural and institutional racism which exists in this country, while at the same time we vigorously attack the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality which is making the very rich much richer while everyone else—especially those in our minority communities—are becoming poorer.”
Van Jones said of Sanders, “He’s shown tremendous character in his willingness to engage and grow and change.” But Vermont is ninety-five per cent white, and Sanders needed to establish stronger bonds with black voters. No African-American leader, Jones observed, would be surprised to get a call from the Clintons. Sanders was “a reliable civil-rights vote, but not somebody who has been connected to these communities, to these kids and their neighborhoods. He’s not showing up to the funerals.”
politicians know the power of a personal story. The first lines of Jeb Bush’s biography on his official campaign site describe how he met his wife, Columba: “My life changed forever when I was a young man on an exchange program in León, Guanajuato, Mexico. Across a plaza, I saw a girl. She spoke little English, and my Spanish was a work in progress. But for me, it was love at first sight.” Hillary Clinton’s official online biography sounds like one of those books about great Americans aimed at young readers: her father’s drapery business and “rock-ribbed” Republicanism, her family’s Methodism, and her youthful turn as a Girl Scout all get their due. Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts senator whose critiques of income inequality presaged Sanders’s Presidential campaign, often speaks of her parents’ economic hardship to help explain her values today.
Sanders’s campaign Web site lists his educational history, says that he is married to Jane Sanders and that they have four children and seven grandchildren, and mentions that he worked as “a carpenter and a documentary filmmaker” before entering politics. That’s it for personal stuff.
There’s something admirable about Sanders’s reluctance to attribute his political beliefs to autobiography: he doesn’t want voters thinking that his commitment to redistributive economics stems from anything other than a deep-seated sense of fairness. He has neither the conventional politician’s instinct for sharing relatable details nor the contemporary left’s reverence for personal testimony. Still, he’s running for President, and so he has reluctantly cracked open the door to his private life, even if his supporters are drawn to him, in part, because of that reluctance.
When I asked Sanders a question about his early years, he sighed with the air of a man who knows he can no longer put off that visit to the periodontist. “I understand,” he said. “I really do. For people to elect a President, you’ve got to know that person—you’ve got to trust them.” He insisted that he was happy to talk about his life. But he couldn’t resist sermonizing first: “When I talk about a political revolution, what I’m talking about is how we create millions of decent-paying jobs, how we reduce youth unemployment, how we join the rest of the world, major countries, in having paid family and sick leave. I know those issues are not quite as important as my personal life.” And then, unnecessarily: “I’m being facetious.”
Sanders did say that two aspects of his upbringing had exerted a lasting influence. One was coming from a family that never had much money. And the other was growing up Jewish—less for the religious content than for the sense it imbued in him that politics mattered. Sanders’s father was a Polish Jew who, at the age of seventeen, came to America shortly after his brother, and struggled through the Depression in Brooklyn. By the time Sanders was born, in 1941, his father was working as a paint salesman. Sanders had an older brother, Larry, and their mother stayed home, like most of the women in their lower-middle-class corner of Flatbush. He went to public schools, including James Madison High School, an incubator of civic talent, from which Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Senator Chuck Schumer also graduated. He didn’t make the school’s championship basketball team—a deep disappointment—but he ran cross-country, and feels that this activity accounts for some of his formidable stamina today.
“There was tension about money,” Sanders said of his family. They lived in a three-and-a-half-room rent-controlled apartment, and his mother pined for a house. “It wasn’t a question of putting food on the table. It was a question of arguing about whether you buy this or whether you buy that. You know, families do this. I remember a great argument about drapes—whether we could afford them. And I remember going with my mother when we had to buy a jacket. We went to literally fifteen different stores to buy the damned cheapest—I mean, the best deal.” He went on, “I do know what it’s like when the electric company shuts off the electricity and the phone company shuts off the phone—all that stuff. So, for me, to talk to working-class people is not very hard.”
I spoke with a few of Sanders’s contemporaries who had grown up in the same neighborhood, and their memories were rosier: they recalled kids playing stickball on safe, familiar streets until their parents called them home for dinner. But Sanders rarely communicates in the key of nostalgia. He’ll talk about how the “great American middle class” is being hollowed out, but unlike some populists he doesn’t dwell lovingly on the nineteen-fifties, when high-paying manufacturing jobs, union membership, and the G.I. Bill allowed single-earner families to prosper. That’s a political strength, because there are many people—African-Americans, above all—for whom the fifties cannot be recalled as an idyll.
Sid Ganis, a Hollywood producer who grew up in the same building as Sanders, described their neighborhood as an enclave of “ordinary secular Jews,” adding, “Some of us went to Hebrew school, but mainly it was an identity in that it got us out of school on Jewish holidays.” Sanders told me that, in the aftermath of the Second World War, his family “got a call in the middle of the night about some relative of my father’s, who was in a displaced-persons camp in Europe someplace.” Sanders learned that many of his father’s other relatives had perished. Sanders’s parents had been fundamentally apolitical, but he took away a lesson: “An election in 1932 ended up killing fifty million people around the world.”
Sanders’s close friend Richard Sugarman, an Orthodox Jew who teaches religious studies at the University of Vermont, said, “He’s not what you would call rule-observant.” But, Sugarman added, “if you talk about his Jewish identity, it’s strong. It’s certainly more ethnic and cultural than religious—except for his devotion to the ethical part of public life in Judaism, the moral part. He does have a prophetic sensibility.” Sugarman and Sanders were housemates for a while in the seventies, and Sugarman says that his friend would often greet him in the morning by saying, “We’re not crazy, you know,” referring to the anger they felt about social injustices. Sugarman would respond, “Could you say good morning first?”
Sanders attended Brooklyn College for a year, then transferred to the University of Chicago, where he joined the Young People’s Socialist League and the Congress on Racial Equality. He also took part in protests for the desegregation of the Chicago public schools and of university-owned housing. Jim Rader, a friend who first met him in Chicago, recalls that Sanders was a “leader of the civil-rights movement on campus.” Sanders, who received a political-science degree in 1964, has said that he was a mediocre student because he found the classroom boring and irrelevant—and that he learned “infinitely more on the streets and in the community.”
By the time Sanders graduated, both his parents had died, and his brother had moved to England. (Larry Sanders, who became a social worker and a Green Party councillor, lives in Oxford.) Jane Sanders told me that it had taken her a long time to realize quite how “alone in the world” her future husband had been during his late teens and early twenties. He did a stint on a kibbutz in Israel, worked as an aide at a psychiatric hospital, taught in a Head Start program, and had a carpentry business with a few other guys in New York. It was called Creative Carpentry, and Rader says that it was accurately named: “They advertised in the Village Voice, but didn’t know much about carpentry. They’d go to the hardware store to buy supplies, and ask the clerk how to do the repairs they’d been hired to do.”
Sanders got married for the first time, to a woman named Deborah Shiling, just after college, and they took a road trip from New York to Vermont, where Sanders had never been. The couple ended up buying eighty-five acres of wooded land near Montpelier, for twenty-five hundred dollars. They had preceded the waves of back-to-the-land hippies. Sanders told me, convincingly, “I wasn’t a hippie.” He’d been enchanted by the thought of living in lush, green Vermont ever since he and his brother had collected some travel brochures touting the state’s farms.
Sanders and Shiling soon divorced. (She eventually became a wine and cheese buyer for a Vermont food co-op.) In 1969, he had a son, Levi, with Susan Campbell Mott, a girlfriend. In July, Politico reported that Levi was not the product of his first marriage, as many people had assumed, in an article titled “Bernie Sanders Has a Secret.” It came as a surprise to reporters who’d covered Sanders for years in Vermont, but it wasn’t the sort of revelation likely to scandalize his supporters in 2015.
Sanders wore his social conscience on his sleeve, but few people who knew him in the sixties and seventies would have predicted that he would become a leading candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination. In those days, he occupied himself by writing freelance articles—critiques of the stultifying effects of office work or the social-control mechanism of television—and by making very low-budget educational filmstrips. It’s safe to say that had Sanders stuck with that career he would not have given Ken Burns a run for his money. One filmstrip, a portrait of Sanders’s hero, the socialist Eugene V. Debs, was rendered with static images that remained on the screen for a good long while. Sanders himself voiced Debs, an Indiana native, making him sound like a guy from Flatbush. A narrator chided viewers that if they were like the average American “who watches television forty hours a week” they would know “such important people as Kojak and Wonder Woman” and “have heard about dozens of different kinds of underarm spray deodorants” but would likely never have heard of Debs. (Another cultural foray of Sanders’s that makes you glad he stuck with politics: a 1987 cassette tape in which he talk-sings folk songs, William Shatner style. Imagine “This Land Is Your Land” recited, in stentorian tones, over reggae-style guitar.)
People who knew Sanders when he was in his thirties tend to share stories about how broke and frugal he was. Rader told me that when Sanders first bought land in Vermont, and was still living part time in New York, he sometimes camped out in the new property’s only shelter: a maple-sugar shack. He had devised his own equivalent of Sterno, which his friends dubbed Berno. “It was a roll of toilet paper soaked in lighter fluid inside a coffee can,” Rader said. “He’d cook over that.”
In 1971, Rader invited Sanders to a meeting of Vermont’s left-wing Liberty Union Party, in Plainfield. Sanders brought his son along, and there’s a photograph of them at the meeting: Sanders is skinny, serious, with a luxuriant head of curls, uninhibited sideburns, and Buddy Holly glasses; his towheaded toddler sits in his lap. The organizers asked if anyone would run for the Senate, and Sanders, one of the willing few, got the nod. It was the beginning of his political career, though he shared the fate of most Liberty Union candidates: he lost by an enormous margin. During the next ten years, he ran twice for senator and twice for governor, and never got more than six per cent of the vote. Nevertheless, he discovered that he had an appetite for campaigning—and a keen desire to hold elected office. “The difference between Bernie and most of the lefties is Bernie wants to win,” Garrison Nelson said. “Most lefties don’t want to win, because if you win you sell out your purity.”
1980, Sanders’s friend Richard Sugarman suggested that he try for mayor of Burlington. Locals were disenchanted with the five-term incumbent, a Democrat named Gordon Paquette. Sanders ran as an Independent, and won by ten votes. Even in Vermont, it was unusual to elect a socialist in the time of Ronald Reagan; Sanders was a thirty-nine-year-old man who didn’t own a suit. As Paula Routly told me, “Monied interests were shaking in their boots at first.”
Yet Sanders turned out to be a popular and effective mayor, and more pragmatic than some might have predicted. True, he travelled to Nicaragua, where he met with Daniel Ortega and found a sister city for Burlington. (Vermont reporters dubbed the mayor and his coalition the Sandernistas.) But he also presided over economic development that transformed the city into a hipper, more forward-looking place—one of those small cities that appear on lists of the most livable. And he did so without the kind of wrenching gentrification that he abhorred. His administration devised creative solutions for preserving affordable housing, including a community land trust that enabled low-income residents to buy homes. It became a model for other cities. Sanders also resisted a developer’s plan to turn the derelict Lake Champlain waterfront into a cluster of high-rises, promising instead public access and open space. Today, the waterfront has a park, a bike trail, a science center, a community boathouse, and limited commercial development. He created a youth office, an arts council, and a women’s commission, and during his tenure minor-league baseball came to Burlington. Business leaders learned, Nelson said, “not to fear him.” Jim Condon, a Vermont state legislator and a former reporter who used to cover Mayor Sanders, wrote of him recently, “He got a lot done, but not through the art of gentle persuasion. Bernie’s style was top-down and confrontational.” Still, he was reëlected three times.
Sanders met Jane O’Meara Driscoll, a community organizer nine years his junior and a divorced mother of three young children, when she invited him to a debate during his first mayoral campaign. After he was elected, he named her the director of a new office dedicated to improving the lives of kids and teen-agers in Burlington. They were married in 1988, and spent what even Sanders admits was “a strange honeymoon,” in the Soviet Union, finalizing a sister-city relationship with the city of Yaroslavl. Jane has worked closely with him ever since, on a volunteer basis—she was his chief of staff for a year in the House, and has handled his press relations at various times. Along the way, she had served as the provost of Goddard College, in Plainfield, where she had earned a bachelor’s degree in social work, and, later, the president of Burlington College. All four children in the Sanders family are now grown. Levi Sanders works as a paralegal at Boston Legal Services; Heather directs the Sedona Yoga Festival with her husband; Carina started a woodworking school, and has served as a state legislator in Vermont; Dave is a senior executive at a quintessential Vermont company, Burton Snowboards.
Jane typically accompanies her husband on the Presidential campaign trail. She smiles more easily than he does, and looks approachable in her slacks and patterned tunic tops. In August, we met in Burlington, and though Jane was nursing a campaign-trail cough, she was animated about her husband: “I feel more, every day, that he can win. My kids find it really frustrating that they always say in the media, ‘But, of course, he can’t win.’” She went on, “I just tell them, ‘They have said he can’t do this until we prove we can. They’re gonna say he can’t until we can. And that’s what’s always happened with Bernie.’” She mentioned a Quinnipiac University poll showing that, in a general-election contest against Donald Trump, Sanders would win by eight percentage points. (The same poll indicated that Vice-President Joe Biden, who is considering entering the race, would win by twelve points.) “Bernie can defeat Republicans—he’s done it here,” Jane said. “And he’s had them join him on certain things. He’s a democratic socialist, but he’ll work with Republicans to get things done.”
When Sanders first ran for the House of Representatives, in 1988, he lost to a Republican named Peter Smith, the scion of a banking family. During Smith’s first term, he co-sponsored an assault-rifle ban. In 1990, Sanders ran again, and the N.R.A. went after Smith, sending letters to its Vermont members describing Sanders as the lesser of two evils, since he wasn’t publicly supporting the ban. Sanders won. This is the origin of the critique that Sanders has weak gun-control credentials for a progressive. Vermont is a gun-friendly state: twenty-eight per cent of its residents own firearms, according to a recent survey, and it has some of the nation’s most permissive gun laws.
In national office, Sanders has not been a vocal proponent of strict gun control. In 1993, he voted against the Brady Bill, objecting to its imposition of a five-day waiting period to buy a handgun. And in 2009 he voted to allow guns in national parks and on Amtrak trains. Over the years, he has also voted for some restrictions, including a semi-automatic-assault-weapons ban and instant criminal-background checks. The N.R.A. has given him grades ranging from C- to F. (It’s a tough grader.) But he has never been out front on the issue, partly because it doesn’t seem to engage him deeply, and partly because he wants to retain the loyalty of voters in northeast Vermont, where hunting is popular. Sanders tends to present guns as an urban problem that Vermonters can afford not to worry about, though mass shootings can happen anywhere and suicides by gun are as much a problem in Vermont as they are in other states. He told me, “I’m proud of my state, and I think I’m in a good position to try to bridge the gap between urban America—where guns mean one thing, where guns mean guns in the hands of kids who are shooting each other or shooting at police officers—and rural America, where significant majorities of people are gun owners, and ninety-nine per cent of them are lawful.”
Sanders’s congressional career did not get off to a promising start. As an Independent, he had a hard time landing committee assignments. Garrison Nelson recalls, “Bernie shows up in Washington in 1991, there’s still a chunk of Southerners in the Democratic caucus, and they do not want Bernie in the caucus.” Sanders didn’t help matters by giving more than one interview denouncing Congress. “This place is not working,” he told the Associated Press. “It is failing. Change is not going to take place until many hundreds of these people are thrown out of their offices.” He went on, “Congress does not have the courage to stand up to the powerful interests. I have the freedom to speak my mind.”
Some of his colleagues returned the favor. Joe Moakley, a Massachusetts Democrat who was the chairman of the influential House Rules Committee, told the A.P. reporter, “He screams and hollers, but he is all alone.” Another Democrat from the Massachusetts delegation, Barney Frank, was even more blunt. “Bernie alienates his natural allies,” he said. “His holier-than-thou attitude—saying, in a very loud voice, he is smarter than everyone else and purer than everyone else—really undercuts his effectiveness.”
Nelson told me that, when he ran into Sanders in Burlington, he warned him not to keep “pissing in the soup,” adding, “You’re our only representative!” According to Nelson, Sanders said, “Gary, you have no idea how totally corrupt it is.” Nelson responded, “Bernie, I’m a historian of Congress. Give me a year, I’ll give you a scandal.”
In time, Sanders became slightly more discriminating in his criticism, and made some allies. He was one of the founding members and the first chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, which has grown steadily over the years, from six members in 1991 to seventy-one today. The C.P.C. produces an annual progressive budget as an alternative to the one that actually passes; it tends to operate mainly as a conscience of the left. He worked hard with Democrats to keep jobs in his state and campaigned to strengthen federal regulation of milk prices, because it helped Vermont dairy farmers. (He once wrote that he’d developed “an almost emotional attachment” to these farmers, despite not knowing “one end of a cow from the other” when he arrived in the state.) In national matters such as curbing the excesses of the Patriot Act, Sanders found that he could at least try to make incremental changes through the amendment process; in 2005, a Rolling Stone profile dubbed him “the amendment king.”
At home, Sanders became a symbol of Vermont’s cussed uniqueness, as affectionately regarded as a scoop of Chunky Monkey. He was reëlected to the House seven times. And his ascent to the Senate, in 2006, was stunning: he trounced the Republican candidate, Richard Tarrant, one of the wealthiest men in the state, by thirty-three percentage points. But when Sanders has run for the Vermont governorship he hasn’t done well. Jim Condon, the state legislator and former reporter, notes, “That’s telling. People here like him making a lot of noise in Washington for a little state—they’re happy to send a human hand grenade down there.” But they don’t necessarily want Sanders running the state.
Since joining the Senate, Sanders has received the most attention for his gestures of defiance—such as his marathon oration against tax cuts for the wealthiest, which was published in book form as “The Speech: A Historic Filibuster on Corporate Greed and the Decline of Our Middle Class.” Still, he has been a very active legislator. An analysis by the nonpartisan Web site GovTrack shows him tied for sixth place among senators who introduced the most bills in the 2013-14 session of Congress, and in tenth place for the number of bills that made it out of committee. The site also noted that he tends to gather co-sponsors for his bills only among Democrats.
Yet Sanders has proved himself capable of bipartisan dealmaking. In the 2013-14 session, he was the chairman of the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee, and though he did not serve in the military—and typically opposes military interventions—he has been a strong advocate for veterans. Last year, he worked with an unlikely ally, the Arizona Republican John McCain, to hammer out a compromise to reform the ailing V.A. health system. The bill provided five billion dollars in additional funding to hire and train new medical staff, made it easier to dismiss V.A. officials for incompetence, and allowed veterans to go outside the system if the wait for a doctor was too long. Sanders explained to reporters that it was far from the bill he would have devised on his own: “It opens up a fear of privatization, which I strongly, strongly am opposed to.” But he sounded pleased with his ball-passing skills: “When you become chairman, you can’t just say, ‘This is the way I want it.’ ”
McCain, in turn, expressed respect for his unlikely partner, telling the Huffington Post, “Negotiating with Bernie was not a usual experience, because he is very passionate and he and I are both very strong-willed people, and we spend a lot of time banging our fists on the table and having the occasional four-letter word. But at the end of the day Bernie was result-oriented.”
Sanders is proud of a few other Senate deals. He successfully made an amendment to the Affordable Care Act which allotted eleven billion dollars for community-health centers to provide primary care regardless of patients’ ability to pay. And, he said, he had done “everything I could do to stop the Republicans—and, sadly, the President and a few Democrats—from cutting Social Security, through the chained C.P.I.” The chained C.P.I., a different way of calculating the annual cost-of-living increases in Social Security, would likely have lowered the increases for most people, and Obama proposed adopting it in his 2014 budget. Sanders helped lead the opposition, and the President recently stopped pushing for the proposal. “It was a tough fight,” Sanders said. “But now, as a result of a lot of grassroots activism, the debate is about expanding Social Security rather than about cutting it.”